He styled himself General of Chariots and Cavalry, and his associates likewise awarded themselves temporary commissions.1
Yet the reason the state continued and did not collapse into destruction was that on the one hand there were excellencies,ministers and high officials such as Yuan An, Yang Zhen, Li Gu, Du Qiao, Chen Fan and Li Ying, who debated in the imperial presence and struggled to support the state with justice and honour in its time of danger.And at the same time there were scholars of plain clothing such as Fu Rong, Guo Tai, Fan Pang and Xu Shao, who held private discussions to help in that time of chaos.
In the ninth month Liu Xu the king of Anping was found guilty of impious conduct and was executed. His kingdom was abolished.
Liu Dai would not follow this advice. He fought the bandits and was killed.
"In setting up teaching or establishing a custom, it is alwaysbest to keep to the middle path, for that is easiest to follow.
Fu Wan had not dared to take any action, but the story was now discovered and Cao Cao was furious.In the eleventh month Cao Cao sent the Imperial Counsellor Chi Lii with authority to receive the seal and tassel of the empress. Hua Xin the Director of the Secretariat accompanied him, and they led soldiers into the palace to arrest her.
In the sixth month on the day xinchou [29 Jul] the Excellency over the Masses Zhu Tian died in office.
Unwilling to see Wang Yun suffer ignominy and disgrace, Yang Ci sent one of his attendants to say to him, with many apologies, "It is because of Zhang Rang that you have been summonsed like this twice in a single month. Evil and difficulty crowd around you, and they are quite unpredictable. Your best policy is to take your own life first."
At this time the Intendant of Henan Fang Zhi, also from Ganling, had a splendid reputation.
As soon as Guan Yu heard that Nan commandery had fallen, he returned in haste to the south.
Then Huangfu Song was appointed General of Chariots and Cavalry on the Left with authority as Governor of Ji province, and was enfeoffed as Marquis of Huaili.
"Why do you say that?" asked Cao Cao.
Dong Zhuo had attacked Zhang Jue without success and was condemned for his failure.
The remnant rebels of Jiuzhen had established a camp in Rinan, and their forces were growing steadily stronger.An imperial edict reappointed the Administrator of Guiyang, Xia Fang, to be Inspector of Jiaozhi.
The emperor took note and became aware of the situation. As a result, all those related to members of the Proscribed Party only by descent from the same great-[162]grandfather, or by lesser degrees, were released from proscription.
When Yuan Shao was in Henei Zhang Yang went to join him, and he camped with the Southern Shanyu Yufuluo by the Zhang River.
and the emperor called upon Fu Xie to justify himself.Fu Xie replied, "Fan Kuai considered Modun to be treacherous, and gave his opinion very forcefully. He did not offend against the proper conduct of a subject in any way, but Ji Bu could say nonetheless that 'Fan Kuai should be executed.'
In the autumn, in the eighth month, a yellow dragon was reported to have appeared in Ba commandery.
Some remnants of Yellow Turban rebels under Guo Da made a rising at Bobo valley in Hexi.2 They ravaged Taiyuan and Hedong commanderies.
Yuan Shao sent him back to Runan with his own menand he joined with a group of bandits under Gong Du, gathering aforce of several thousand men.
By this means, the cause of peace and harmony will flourish, and generous treatment of one's own flesh and blood will be maintained.
Xu Shu went to call upon Liu Bei at Xinye, and Liu Bei held him in high regard.
while the highest members of thecourt or government sometimes bring their own food and drink tothe office.
In the eighth month on the day xinchou [18 Sep] the emperor moved into the Yang'an Apartments of the Southern Palace.
They still commanded several thousand horsemen, and some people urged Cao Cao to follow up and attack them again.Cao Cao said, "I shall arrange that Gongsun Kang takes the heads ofYuan Shang and Yuan Xi and sends them to me. No need to bother with soldiers."
Zhang Huan observed that the Southern Shanyu, [Ju]che'er, had proved incapable of keeping his state in order, so he took him into custody and sent in a recommendation that the Luli King of the Left should become Shanyu.
In the autumn, in the seventh month Yuan Shang returned withmore than ten thousand men to the relief of Ye.
and as he comes from his defences he will be less vigilant. That is the easy way to destroy him."
Yuan Shao had Zang Hong's fellow-townsman Chen Lin write a letter urging him to give in, but Zang Hong replied, "I am a mean fellow, lacking both ambition and ability. I happened to meet our master [Yuan Shao] when I was travelling as an emissary, and since then I have received his courtesy, favour and generous kind ness. So I hold office in this great province. Do you think I am pleased to bear arms against him now?
Indeed, the governors and administrators are not good men.Some of them have been appointed through recommendations of the eunuchs, they are afraid to disobey the instructions they receive from above, and they follow them quite thoughtlessly.
Your majesty has failed to apply a clear understanding, to examine and distinguish true from false.You have granted these people the same ranks and fiefs as you award your loyal ministers, so that fine gloss is mixed with ordinary colour.This may be described as casting gold and jade amongst sand and gravel, and throwing the gui and bi insignia intodust and mud.All the people will hear of it, and everyone will sigh with indignation.
He encouraged the planting of mulberry trees and gave adviceon rearing cattle, and every family became prosperous and wealthy.
Jian'an 5: 200 AD
When XuGong came to take over the commandery Gao Dai brought ShengXian to take refuge with the household of Xu Zhao, leader of anencampment.
"The empire can do without me," said Cao Hong, "but it cannot do without you."
The emperor asked the Colonel Who Exterminates the Caitiffs He Xun, "If I practice for war like this, what do you think of it?"
Dong Zhuo said to Yuan Shao, "The master of the empire should be a man of worth and wisdom: whenever I think of Emperor Ling, I become angry. Lord Dong [Liu Xie the King of Chenliu] seems possible. If I give him the throne, however, would he be any better than Lord Shi [the current emperor Liu Bian]?
Good men are the foundation of the state, while the record of affairs is the code of the nation. If he destroys the foundations and does away with the code, how can he last long?"
You treat men in straightforwardfashion, and you have no use for empty finery. So scholars withloyal hearts, who can see things clearly and are sincere, all wantto serve you. This is superior virtue.
"At the beginning, if Dong Zhuo had relied on the imperial house, held the old capital [Luoyang] and turned east to take the offensive against the rest of the empire, then even though he was acting as a criminal it would have made things difficult.
At that time the whole world was in turmoil andoverturned, and the Han dynasty had not a foot of ground nor asingle man under its command.
Cao Cao appointed the Attendant Officer of Ji province Cui Yan, as Senior Clerk in the Department of the West under the Imperial Chancellor, and Mao Jie of Chenliu, former Senior Clerk in the Department of the East under the Excellency of Works, took an equivalent post under the Chancellor. The magistrate of Yuancheng, Sima Lang of Henei, became Registrar, his younger brother Yi became Senior Clerk for Literary Scholarship, and theRegistrar of Ji province Lu Yu, became Consultant Foreman Clerkin the Department of Law.
The Excellency of Works Xun Shuang saw that Dong Zhuo had already made up his mind, and he was afraid he might harm Yang Biao and his supporters. He therefore said in placatory fashion, "How can the Chancellor of State enjoy this situation?
"Ill-mannered fellow,M replied Yan Yan. "You have invaded our province, but our province has only generals who take heads, not generals who surrender.
Zhonghui said, 'Take their states from thosewho are in disorder, and deal firmly with those on the road toruin.'
The court sent Zhang Jin of Nanyang to be Inspector of Jiaoprovince.
Wang Yun growled to them, "I am the emperor's servant. If I have done wrong in his eyes, then I must accept his punishment and answer for my faults before the world. How can I seek death by taking poison?"
Sun Quan was most impressed, and he discussed the matterwith his ministers.
On the day gengwu [24 Sep] Zhang Rang, Duan Gui and others were in difficulty and distress. Leading the Little Emperor and the King of Chenliu, with several dozen men on foot they went out the Gu Gate and came by night to the Xiaoping Crossing. They [left in such haste they] could not take the six seals, and none of the high ministers were able to accompany them.Only the Master of Writing Lu Zhi and the Head of the Central Precinct of Henan Min Gong came by night to the Yellow River.
In the twelfth month on the day xinhai [11 Jan 200]43 Sun Cecame to Shaxian. Liu Biao sent his nephew Liu Hu and Han Xi ofNanyang with five thousand spearmen to help Huang Zu.
Sun Ce appointed himself Administrator of Kuaiji. He maintainedYu Fan as Officer of Merit and treated him with all the courtesy of afriend.
In the rest of the document, he presented a general argument that the troubles of the empire all came from the eunuchs.
Gao Rou of Chenliu said to his countrymen, "At present General Cao holds only Yan province, but in his heart he has plans for conquest everywhere. He will never be content to stay here.
Cao Hong followed this plan. He went forward to attack Wu Lan, defeated him and took his head.
The rebels abandoned their baggage and fled to the Yellow River,
Cao Cao was about to bring his forces eastwards down the Yangzi from Jiangling.
Their teachings are those of purity and emptiness, with particular emphasis on action only in accordance with the way. They love life and hate killing, they eliminate desires and reject ostentation.
On the day guichou [9 Mar] the Minister of the Imperial Household Yuan Pang of Chen kingdom became Excellency over the Masses.
Go and see him, and tell him what will happen."
Ever since the Zhongping period the empire had been divided anddisordered. People left their farmlands,
Though the ruler of Chu offered rewards for Wu Yun, and [Emperor Gao of] Han pursued Ji Bu;49 neither were so fierce as this.
The Administrator of Lujiang, Li Shu, had attacked and killed theInspector of Yang province Yan Xiang,52 and Mei Qian, Lei Xu andChen Lan of Lujiang each collected forces of several ten thousandsbetween the Yangzi and the Huai.
Give me twenty or thirty thousand good soldiers and let me go forward to Xiakou. I guarantee to defeat him for you."
Luo city fell, and Liu Bei went on to besiege Chengdu.
The Director of Retainers Li Ying immediately ordered [the son's] arrest, but then the amnesty was issued and he was allowed to escape punishment.
He sentmessengers to make great sacrifice to Qiao Xuan,
The eunuch leaders took He Jin's head and tossed it to them: "He Jin planned to rebel; he has been executed."
In this memorial, you have gone beyond your proper authority and discuss the affairs of the emperor's personal staff. By what precedent, either in classical texts or the regulations of Han, do you justify this? We ask that the minister reply in detail." Yang Bing sent in his answer, "The Zuo Chronicle of the Spring and Autumn Annals says, 'charged to remove the danger to my ruler, I regarded nothing but how I might be able to do it.'
Earlier, when he first arrived in Luoyang, there was no-one who recognised his abilities. Fu Rong of Chenliu saw him just once and sighed in admiration, and he then introduced him to Li Ying, the Intendant of Henan.
The governors of provinces and administrators of commanderies all follow the way the wind is blowing, and in their selection of candidates for office they reject the worthy men and put forward fools. It is for this reason that locusts appear, and that there is so much trouble from barbarians and bandits. Heaven has been angry about this for more than ten years now, so year after year there have been eclipses above and earthquakes below, in attempts to reprimand the ruler and bring him to his senses, that he may weed out those [of his ministers and attendants] who are unsuitable.
In the autumn, in the seventh month on the day bingwu [9 Aug], the Empress Liang died.
On the day bingchen [6 Feb 196] Yuan Shu recommended Sun Ce as Acting General Who Destroys Criminals.
Lu Su was intending to return to the north,57 but Zhou Yu persuadedhim not to, then recommended him to Sun Quan, "Lu Su has abilitywhich can be valuable to us. You should look widely for men likehim to assist your great work."
and SunCe was going to kill him. Everyone was anxious and at a loss whatto do.
When Lü Meng reached Xunyang, he hid his best troops in barges and had men in plain clothes rowing, so they looked like merchants. Travelling day and night,
In the ninth month Li Jue became General of Chariots and Cavalry with command as Director of the Retainers bearing the Staff of Authority. Guo Si was General of the Rear, Fan Chou General of the Right and Zhang Ji General of Agile Cavalry. All were enfeoffed as marquises.
"Now, however, the only people consulted are the Masters of Writing, and there are even cases where imperial orders are dispatched without the knowledge of the Three Excellencies nor of the Masters of Writing. So the excellencies have been relieved of their duty for selection and appointment, and the Masters of Writing are no longer concerned when anyone behaves badly. As a result, nobody can be held responsible; and why should officials do a difficult job if there is no incentive of reward or punishment?"
An imperial edict had appointed Hu Mao of Yingchuan as Inspector, and Liu Zhang's officers Shen Mi, Lou Fa and Gan Ning rebelled and attacked Liu Zhang. They gained, however, no success, and fled to Jing province.
Yuan Shao's troops maintained their pursuit to Jie Bridge. Gongsun Zan regrouped his men to turn and fight, but Qu Yi again defeated him. They came to Gongsun Zan's camp and seized his standard,and the rest of his army took to flight.
Wang Guo, a man of Didao, sent the former Administrator of Jiuquan Huang Yan to say to Fu Xie, "The empire is gone forever from the government of Han. Magistrate, would you be prepared to become our leader?"
In former times, a man who cultivated his virtue could expect to bring down upon himself a mass of good fortune.
There was respect and good feeling among the troops, and regulations were well maintained.
Later, Tao Qian arrested all the gentlemen who had come to live in his province, and people admired Xu Shao for his prescience.
In the spring, in the second month the Xianbi raided Yanmen.
Fu Rong said to Li Ying, "These two men never earned real fame for their conduct, but they maintain themselves now like the heroes of the age. They have excellencies and ministers asking about their illnesses, and imperial officials sitting at their gateway.
They repeatedly offered to cede himthe territory and even to send hostages.
The Three Excellencies have sent in letters to ask that you show pity upon Liu Zhi and his colleagues, but no further investigation has been made, and the excellencies themselves have been harshly reprimanded. As a result, ministers who care for the nation will now be afraid to speak out.
'That is not the way. It is like keeping an eagle: if he is hungry he can be used, but when he is well fed he will fly away.'
In the autumn, in the seventh month Cao Cao went south to attack Liu Biao.
In the autumn, in the seventh month on the day renzi [11 Aug] the Grand Commandant Zhu Jun was dismissed.
When Sun Jian went away on campaign he left his family at Shouchun,
Cao Cao had Xun Yu appointed as Palace Attendant withresponsibility as Director of the Secretariat.
On the other hand, he was weak and compliant, cautious and restrained. He always maintained a respectful demeanour and humble speech, seeking to please whoever might be in a position of power at the time. He lacked any spirit of upright and independent loyalty, and for this reason the people of the empire thought little of him.
Moreover, though Guan Yu and his master [Liu Bei] boast of their pretended power, they are very erratic and we cannot trust them.
So they called together the powerful local families and sent a message to the capital to say that the Black Mountain bandits were attacking commanderies and counties and they needed to raise troops.
Lii Meng sent letters to Changsha, Lingling and Guiyang, and all those who saw how things were going came to submit. Only [486] the Administrator of Lingling, He Pu, held to his city and would not surrender.
Zang Hong was currently the Administrator of Dong command- ery. With bare feet, crying and weeping, he begged Yuan Shao for soldiers to go to Zhang Chao's relief, but Yuan Shao refused. He asked to lead men from his own command, but Yuan Shao would not allow that either.
At such a time, even though a fellow of meanest ability holds the position, his grace will match Heaven and Earth, and his authority equals that of the spirits. Thousands of Dukes of Zhou or Confucius could not rival his wisdom, and a million Meng Ben or Xia Yu could not contend with him in courage.
In the eighth month, as Cao Cao was climbing White Wolf Mountain, he was suddenly faced by great numbers of the enemy.
Liu Yan shifted his administration to Mianzhu, settled the unrest, and was careful to act generously and to obtain the support of the people.
"The people ofYi province have recently suffered warfare. You must return their fields and houses to them, and order them to live in peace and renew their occupations. Later, you can get labour- service and taxes from them, and you will gain their affection, but you should not rob them now to give presents to your favourites."
Li Jue and his fellows appointed Jia Xu as Eastern Supporter, and they intended to enfeoff him as a marquis.
The Major of the Forward Division of Yi province, Fei Shi of Jianwei, was sent to carry the seal and ribbon to Guan Yu. When Guan Yu learnt that Huang Zhong had been given the same rank as himself he was extremely angry. "I'm better than that clod!"
The first thing to do is to give strict orders to the Inspectors and the heads of commanderies and kingdoms that they must stop people wandering about and send them back to their own territory. This way we shall isolate his party and can then punish the ringleaders. Everything would be settled without trouble."
When Lü Bu isdefeated, you will be destroyed too."
Before this, the General of Chariots and Cavalry Dong Cheng had asecret edict from the emperor. Hiding it in [268] his clothing, hemade plans with Liu Bei to kill Cao Cao.
and Dong Zhuo was very pleased. He was impressed with the king, and since he had been brought up by the Dowager Dong, and Dong Zhuo himself claimed to be of the same clan as the Dowager, he took it in mind to depose the emperor and set up the king.
When the scouts saw Zhou Yu's ships appear, they hastened to tell him.Liu Bei sent men to welcome them,
This is the way Han Lu and Dongguo [Suan] woreeach other out, so they both fell prey to an old peasant."
andZhang Liao told him about Cao Cao's miraculous ability in war,how he extended his virtue far and wide, and how those who joinedhim early would receive great rewards. So Chang Xi promised tosurrender.
So the siege of Boma was broken, and thepeople were shifted west up the Yellow River.
The attendants of the emperor are powerful and oppressive;can they be removed?"
Guo Gong saw that Xun Yu was quite unafraid. Judging that Juancheng would be difficult to attack, he led his men away.
At that time Gongsun Zan's men were scattered outside the city, and in their hurry to escape they even attempted to break through the eastern wall of the city.Liu Yu's soldiers, however, had no organisation and no training inbattle. He respected the houses of civilians, giving strict orders not to burn them, and he warned the commanders of his army, "We do not harm others, we have only to kill one Bogui [Gongsun Zan]."
Xu Zhi attended on him, and they discussed questions of moral principle. Then Huang Qiong rose to high position, and Xu Zhi had no more contact with him.
In addition to this, an edict ordered provincial and commandery authorities to seek further for any students, former officers, fathers and sons or brothers [of men of the Proscribed Party] who currently held office, and these people too were to be dismissed and [136] forbidden further employment. The proscription was extended to the fifth degree of kinship.
Confucius said, 'To be an emperor is to be a judge.'
Zhang Liao told Cao Cao what Guan Yu had said and Cao Caosaw the justice of it.
Jia Xu said, "I suggest you pay attention to themeasure of your virtue, observe the manners of a simple scholar, bediligent day and night, and do not offend against the proper conduct of a son. That is all."
In the precedents of Han, there is no subject from which the Three Excellencies are debarred."
Jian'an 24: 219 AD，3 February 219 - 21 February 220
Before this, Emperor Ling had called Dong Zhuo to be Minister Steward, but Dong Zhuo sent in a memorial saying, "My Huangzhong auxiliaries and the barbarians from the northwest have all come to me, saying, 'We have received no wages and no supplies have come through. Our wives and children are hungry and cold.'
Yuan Tan's officer Liu Xun raised a force at Tayin to opposeYuan Tan, and the other cities supported him.
Geng Bi had appointed Cheng Qiu as his Headquarters Officer, but Cheng Qiu was in league with a gang of profiteers and extortioners, and all the gentry and common people hated him.
In the summer in the fourth month the Grand Commandant Guo Xi left office. The Palace Counsellor Wenren Xi became Grand Commandant.
In the spring, in the first month Cao Cao advanced to the mouth ofthe Ruxu River, with foot-soldiers and horsemen described as fourhundred thousand. He attacked and over-ran Sun Quan's camp onthe west of the Yangzi, and captured his Chief Controller GongsunYang.
In the third month the Minister of Justice Cui Lie became Excellency over the Masses.
Concerned at this, Cao Jie and Wang Fu made false accusation against Dong Meng, claiming that he had spoken improperly of the Dowager [Dong, the natural mother of Emperor, who resided in the] Palace of Perpetual Joy. Dong Meng was sent to prison and died there.
Wei Gu and the others joined Gao Gan and Zhang Cheng, andthey attacked Du Ji together, but they could not overcome him.They attempted to take over the counties, but could capture none ofthem.
Cao Cao increased the salary of Du Ji the Administrator ofHedong to Fully Two Thousand shi.
Liu Biao thought only that Han Song was reluctant, and insistedthat he go.
Before this, when Li Gu was formally dismissed [in 147],1 he realised that he could not escape disaster, and he sent his three sons Ji, Zi and Xie, back to their home country [of Hanzhong commandery].At this time Xie was thirteen.Li Xie's elder sister Wenji was the wife of Zhao Boying, a man from the same commandery.When she saw the two elder brothers return, she got the whole story from them.Then she sighed to herself and said, "The Li family will be destroyed.
About this time Dong Zhuo entered the passes [to Chang'an], and Yuan Shao brought his army back to the Yan Crossing. He sent his nephew Gao Gan of Chenliu with Han Fu's friends Xin Ping of Yingchuan, Xun Shen, Guo Tu and others to say to Han Fu, "Gongsun Zan is coming with an army from Yanand Dai [the north], and will follow his success with a further advance. All the commanderies will join him, and you cannot match his strength.
[In the third month] on the day renshen [^gengshen = 21 Apr] Ma Teng brought his soldiers into position at the Changping Observatory.
Your present plan takes no account of these three good principles. Please think it over again."
He also gave generous rewards to Huan Jie and appointed him a Master of Writing.
At the present time there are long delays in filling vacancies there. Junior officers and common people stretch their necks to look [for the arrival of the new officials], yet procedures in the offices of the Three Excellencies continue from one month to the next with nothing decided.
Chen Fan and Dou Wu were annoyed at this.There came an occasion they met together at the court, and Chen Fan said privately to Dou Wu, "Cao Jie, Wang Fu and the rest of them have held power since the time of the late emperor, and they have confused and disturbed all the empire. Unless we execute them now, they will certainly upset things for us later."
When Guo Si realised his plan had been found out, he abandoned his troops and went away to the southern hills.
but Pei Qian said, "The Shanyu know that they have been acting badly. If I go with an army they will certainly become frightened and will close the border against us. If I take no more than a small escort they will not be concerned. We must show some strategy."
"Again, I have heard that sacrifices have been held within the palace to Huang-Lao and the Buddha.
and he sent the countyofficers back to their own territories to settle and collect them.
Then the people of Dai, Guangyang,Shanggu and Youbeiping commanderies killed the officials appointed by Gongsun Zan and sent troops to join Xianyu Fu and Liu He. Gongsun Zan's army was defeated time and again.
At the same time, if he should be here, it is my judgement that he is a celebrated scholar; is it really necessary for your honour to arrest him?"
At this time, however, if wolves are on the road and the fox is taken first, then people may believe your majesty is avoiding the strong but attacking the weak. You cannot display your courage by punishing him, and you will not be unduly generous if you leave him alone.
It is obvious that his strength is almost exhausted. The decisivemoment is approaching, and this is the time to surprise him. Do notmiss your chance."
Mao Rong asked him about affairs of state, but Xu Zhi made no reply.
When the Xiongnu and the Wuhuan heard that Zhang Huan was coming, they all came to surrender, two hundred thousand people altogether.
The letter was memorialised, and all three were released from their punishments.
Some sold their property and left their homes to follow him. The pilgrims blocked the roads, and more than ten thousand of them became ill and died before they reached him.
Many of them have joined Han Sui's army, but they will certainly come back to help their femilies.
In the ninth month the leaders of the Zong people [and of seven clans] of Ba, Fuhu, Duhu and Ren Yue, brought their forces to join Cao Cao.
Li Shu the Administrator of Lujiang refused to submit to Sun Quanand several times took in fugitives and rebels against him.
Sun Ce lovedhunting and often went out riding. His horse was very good andnone of his escort could keep up.
As they returned, however, Jia Xu was on the city wall and hesaid to Zhang Xiu, "Go back after him at once. If you fight this timeyou are sure to win."
Every person with a quarrel or dispute would have the case judged by Wang Lie. Some turned back on the way [because they knew they were in the wrong], others would see his house and retreat. Each encouraged the other to act well, for none dared have a bad report reach Wang Lie.
At this time Yang Qiu was out on a tour of inspection of the imperial tombs. Without waiting for the official instructions to be prepared, Cao Jie had the Director of the Secretariat summon him to his new appointment.
Zhang Lu was prepared to surrender Hanzhong but his younger brother Wei would not agree. He led several ten thousand men to guard the pass, and he built almost ten li of fortifications across the mountains.
"In former times, when Duke Yi punished the father of Bing Chu and took for himself the wife of Yan Zhi, he caused these two men to combine forces and he met with disaster amongst the bamboo.
When Lu Bu left Yuan Shao and was on the way to Zhang Yang,he stayed with Zhang Miao, and as he was about to leave they took hands and swore an oath together.
"Now you have inherited the property of your father and yourbrother, and the people of six commanderies. Your soldiers aregood, you have plenty of supplies, and the people obey yourcommands.
But just as Zhang Wen could not use my advice, so Zhou Shen could not use Sun Jian's, and in the end they were defeated and turned back.
The court sent the Director of Retainers Zhong Yao and the Inspector of Liang province Wei Duan to make peace between them, and Ma Teng was called in to camp at Huaili.
To solve the problem, they need only punish the ringleaders; a single prison guard would be enough for that. Why such a fuss, calling in soldiers from outside? If he intends to kill them all, the plan will certainly leak out. I can already foresee his failure."
If instead we press him too hard, Sun Quan will change his plans and turn against us. His majesty the king will certainly give deep thought to this question."
Li Jue, Guo Si and Fan Chou controlled the government and the court, while Zhang Ji went out to camp in Hongnong.
That way, if I lived I would not be turning my back on the orphaned and weak, and if I died there would be no shame below the ground.
Cao Cao asked Guo Jia. Guo Jia said, "There is truth in that.
"Gongjin's advice is right," added the Lady Wu.
It [65] is in this tradition that Emperor Wu brought Han Anguo from his convict status, and Emperor Xuan called Zhang Chang from his position as a fugitive.
People were anxious and fearful: as they passed one another on the roads they did no more than exchange glances [not daring to speak].
One man under Lü Meng's command, who came from the same commandery, took a straw rain-hat from a family of the people toprotect a coat of mail belonging to the government. Though the armour was official property, Lü Meng still held he had disobeyed orders. He would not remit the law simply because the man came from his own district: he wept and beheaded him.
The King of WEI commands a million men in arms, and his authority shakes the empire.
A daughter of Dong Cheng had been made an Honoured Lady, and when Cao Cao executed Dong Cheng [in 200] he asked for the woman, to kill her.
Huang Gai, a divisional commander under Zhou Yu, said, "The enemy are many and we are few. It will be difficult to hold them for long.
but Jia Biao said, "The Zuo Chronicle talks of 'acting according to the requirements of the time, but not embarrassing those who come after you.'
He went on to fight in Changshan with the Black Mountain bandit Zhang Yan, with four detachments of the Chuge [group of the Xiongnu] and the Wuhuan from Yanmen.
In the third month, it was once again ordered that inspectors and officials of Two Thousand shi and above should not carry out the three-year mourning period.
I had no real authority but I have set them in order. They certainlyhate me and I shall not be able to maintain my command of them forlong. So I pass them to you."
Sun Ce made his preparations and marched to Qiantang. ChenYu, however, planned a surprise attack on Sun Ce, and he was insecret contact with Zu Lang, White Tiger Yan and others, to havethem act as his allies behind the lines.
In the spring, in the first month on the day jimao [16 Feb], there was an amnesty for the empire.
The Director of the Secretariat Yang Qiu wrote to protest, "I observe that Yue Song, Jiang Lan and their fellows are all of mean origin, petty men who are no more than the tools of others. They rely upon those who have held positions for generations, they depend upon the influence of powerful men, and they flutter their eyelashes in obsequious fashion as they seek for advancement.
Yuan Shu asked provisions from Chen, but Luo Jun refused.Furious, Yuan Shu sent retainers to kill Liu Chong and Luo Jun bytreachery. So the state of Chen was destroyed.
Following up this success, the men went forward by land and water. They came to the walls, attacked them with all their might, and so they stormed the fortress.
In the third month an edict established Duke Cao of WEI above all the kings. His insignia was changed to a seal of gold with a red ribbon, and a Cap for Long Journeys.
If the man who rules as king has some intention in his mind, even though this is not yet expressed in his countenance, nevertheless the planets are influenced by it, and the Yin and Yang are affected in their changes.
"I was still young at that time. I built a fine house fifty li east ofQiao,11 and I proposed to read books in autumn and summer, andshoot and hunt in winter and spring. That was my plan for twentyyears: to wait until the empire was reformed, then come out fromretirement to accept some appointment.
Liu Ba, however, went north to Duke Cao of WEI, who appointed him a Senior Clerk and sent him to manage the takeover of Changsha, Lingling and Guiyang.
When the requirements of conduct are awkward andexaggerated, they only encourage secrecy and deception."
Ni Heng of Pingyuan had been known as a fine debater since he wasyoung, but he was proud and arrogant. Kong Rong [210] recom mended him to Cao Cao.
Though Zhuge Jin was sent on many embassies to SHU, he spoke with his younger brother Liang only in public assemblies, and never sought a private meeting.
Then Emperor Ling died and the empire fell into disorder. With a following of several thousand horsemen, Yufuluo joined the Bobo bandits to raid commanderies and counties.
As soon as it was light, Chunyu Qiong and the others saw how fewmen Cao Cao had with him, and they set out their line of battlebefore the gates of the camp. Cao Cao attacked at once. ChunyuQiong retreated to the shelter of the camp, but Cao Cao followed upand attacked him again.
When people came to open a lawsuit, he would tell themwhat was right and what was wrong, then send them back to think itover; so the elders of the people blamed themselves for any quarrel,and they no longer enjoyed going to law.
then good officials will know that it is worthwhile to support the state, and wrongdoers will realise the dangers they run by their private plunder of public property. The barbarian horsemen can be prevented from spying along the Great Wall, and the men who keep watch on the frontier will have no further cause to fear harm."
Xi Zuochi discusses this:Yan Pu advised Zhang Lu not to take the title of king, and Cao Cao remembered this and enfeoffed him. What man in a future time will not be inspired to follow the right Way?
"A loyal minister, it might seem, would kill himself to appease his master's anger, and a filial son would give his life to soothe his father's rage. So the great Shun refused to avoid the dangers of the earthen granary or the deep-dug well, and Shensheng made no arguments against the wicked slanders of his father's wife.
The Attendant Officer Wang Xiu of Beihai brought officers andmen from Qing province to aid Yuan Tan,
In the summer, in the fifth month on the day jichou [2 Jul] there was rain and hail in the capital district.
Cui Yan and Mao Jie were together in charge of promotions, and those whom they recommended for appointment were all scholars of purity and honesty. Though there were many men who had fine reputations but lacked personal integrity, none gained advancement.
Zhao Yun of Changshan brought troops from his native commandery to join Gongsun Zan. "I hear that the men of your worthy province all turn to Yuan," said Gongsun Zan. "Why are you the exception, and prepared to oppose him?"
n the summer in the fourth month some bandits of Changsha made a rising and plundered in Guiyang and Cangwu.
The Minister of Finance Huang Qiong became Grand Commandant,44 the Palace Counsellor Zhu Tian of Zhongshan became Excellency over the Masses, and the Minister Herald Sheng Yun of Liang kingdom became Excellency of Works.
Liu Biao sent Liu Bei to make raids in the north. He came to She,
An edict ordered the Three Excellencies and the Director of Retainers to arrest and question all the attendants and guards of the palace and the common people of the capital district who were followers of Zhang Jue's teaching. More than a thousand people were executed.Orders were sent to Ji province that Zhang Jue and his followers should be arrested.
Showing no change to his expression Yan Yan observed, "Beheading is beheading. Why make a fiiss about it?” Recognising his courage, Zhang Fei him free, and kept him as a guest.
All the cities under Yuan Tan had submitted and only theAdministrator of Le'an, Guan Tong, would not surrender.
That night Zhou Yu spoke again with Sun Quan, and said,"Whenthose men saw Cao Cao's letter about eight hundred thousand soldiers and sailors, they were all afraid, and the advice they offered was given without any thought whether the figures were true or he was simply boasting. It was quite pointless.
Huangfu Song's nephew Huangfu Li said to his uncle, "It is either you or Dong Zhuo who must hold command over the armies of the empire.
In the sixth month on the day xinchou [21 Aug] the Household Counsellor Chong Fu became Excellency of Works.
Yuan Yi fled to Pei, where he was killed by soldiers.
"Many people at this time follow the words of prophecies and try to match affairs to the texts of unorthodox books. Thinking only of pleasing their master, they pay no attention to reality.
Guan Yu saw Yan Liang's standard in the distance.Whipping his horse, he broke through to Yan Liang among the tenthousand men of his army, took off his head and came back. No-onecould withstand him.
They advanced to the attack at day-break, and by breakfast-time they had taken the city. They captured Zhu Guang and several score thousands of men and women.
Ying Feng sent in a letter, saying, "Now, loyal and worthy military commanders are the backbone of the state.
Xun You said, "Liu Biao and Zhang Xiu have lately beendefeated, and they will not dare make a move.
In the eleventh month Zhang Lu came with his family and followers to surrender.
During this time, as news of the coup spread outward, and couriers dashed here and there on their several missions, the high officials had lost their authority, and there were rumours and confusion in the offices and yamens, in the markets and the streets.After a few days, however, everything became quiet again, and the ordinary people were delighted.
When Zhai Rong arrived, he did deceive Zhu Hao and kill him, and he took his place as head of the commandery.
In this year, the son Liu Xi of the late [Liu] Rong, former King of Langye, was made King of Langye.
If only good officers had been sent to drive them away beyond the frontiers, and if only good officials had been selected to shepherd them, there would surely have been no need for the officials in charge of border affairs to have taken such pleasure in that multitude of killings.
When I die, I wish to be buried on the slopes of Shouyang Mountain. On the one hand, I shall not be turning away from Heaven, and at the same time I shall feel no shame before [Bo]yi and [Shu]qi."
Qiao Xuan said to Cao Cao, "You have made no name for yourself yet. You should get in touch with Xu Zijiang."
As Lu Bu's army came closer he sent out skirmishers. The moment the two lines met, the men that had been hidden climbed the embankment and charged together horse and foot. They completely defeated the enemy, chased them all the way to their camp, and then returned. Lu Bu withdrew that night.
Huang Zu also treated Ni Heng well, but Ni Heng laterinsulted Huang Zu in public and Huang Zu killed him.61 [211>212]
"Since the Xiongnu have fled away, the Xianbi have become powerful and prosperous and have occupied their former territory. They can claim a hundred thousand soldiers, skilled and strong, and their ideas and understanding are steadily increasing. Add to this the facts that our guard-passes and barriers lack strength; that our prohibitions [against trade] are full of holes, and that fine gold and good iron are in the hands of the enemy while they also have renegades from Han to serve them as masters of strategy; then in the sharpness of weapons and the clash of horse they are more dangerous than were the Xiongnu.
Chen Fan slapped his mat in delight.
In the summer, in the fourth month on the day jiaxu, first of the month [24 May], there was an eclipse of the sun.
2: 173 AD
Those who were told this believedit, and they went on as before.
You can either take Hui of Liuxia as a model: stay at court and maintain your virtue regardless of others' bad conduct; or you can follow the example of Fan Li: go away and change your occupation. Just sitting there disapproving is no use at all."
On the day bingyin [miswritten for bingshen = 19 Sep] Zhang Ji was made General of Agile Cavalry, with offices like the Three Excellencies. Guo Si became General of Chariots and Cavalry, Yang Ding was General of the Rear and Yang Feng was General Who Brings Righteousness to Flourish;
Sui Gu took some of his men north to ask help from YuanShao, but Shi Huan and Cao Ren intercepted him at Quancheng,attacked and beheaded him.
On the day guimao [20 Sep] the General Who Gives Tranquillity to the State Zhang Yang was made Grand Marshal, Yang Feng became General of Chariots and Cavalry and Han Xian was named General-in-Chief with authority as Director of Retainers. All held the Staff of Authority and Battleaxes.
The Excellency of Works Han Yan became Excellency over the Masses.The Minister of Ceremonies Sun Lang of Beihai became Excellency of Works.
"Look at this city now: it cannot be very secure. If we use all our strength and make fierce attacks on all sides at once, we can take it by storm. Then we can go back while the water is still high. This is the way to certain success."
About this time, the coffin and funeral cortege of one of his friends came by on a mourning journey. Huangfu Gui crossed the borders of his territory to pay his respects, then sent one of his clients secretly to inform the Inspector of Bing province, Hu Fang, saying that he had left his military base without proper authority and Hu Fang should report this immediately.
When they reached Jiangzhou they defeated and captured Yan Yan, Administrator of Ba commandery.
"Now the imperial carriage has returned, but the eastern capitalis overgrown and neglected. All loyal men hope to preserve theimperial house, and the people long sadly for the past.
The eight kingdoms of Qi, Beihai, Fuling, Xiapi, Changshan, Ganling, Jiyin [for Jibei] and Pingyuan were all abolished.
The Xianlian Qiang of Beidi joined with bandits from Fuhan and Heguan to make rebellion. Beigong Boyu and Li Wenhou, of the Auxiliary of Loyal Barbarians from Huangzhong, were elected generals of the combined forces. They killed the Protector of the Qiang Ling Zheng.
Zhongping 中平 5: 188 AD
Du Ji stayed in the commandery for sixteen years, and he wasalways judged the best administrator in the empire.
In the winter, in the tenth month, on the day xinchou [3 Dec] there was an earthquake in the capital district.
Next day, when Liu Bei came himself to Zhao Yun's camp, he saw the battle-field and said: "Zilong is all bravery!"
So he gave Qiu Xiang a month's salary, and sent him to the Imperial University.
and also make my aged mother a fugitive?"
Before this, Shi Xie of Cangwu was Administrator of Jiaozhi.
Before this, the Protector of the Qiang Duan Jiong had settled the Western Qiang,but the Xianlian and other groups of the Eastern Qiang had still not submitted. The General on the Liao Huangfu Gui and the General of the Household Zhang Huan had brought them in year after year, but each time they surrendered they would rebel again afterwards.
Chen Gui went to his post, and all the provincial and commandery officials held him in awe.He gave the people some time of rest, he reduced expenditure, and by careful planning he saved thousands of millions of cash every year.
and the Inspector of Yan province, Diwu Zhong, sent his Assistant Officer Wei Yu to investigate him.He discovered fifty or sixty million [cash] taken [by Shan Kuang].Diwu Zhong then reported against Shan Kuang, and extended the charge to implicate Shan Chao.
Xianyu Fu came in person to meet Cao Cao at Guandu,and Cao Cao made him General Who Crosses the Liao on the Rightand sent him back to settle the territory of You province.
Pei Qian treated them with grace and authority, and the Shanyu respected him and submitted.
The Administrator of Beidi, Huangfu Song, gave his opinion that the proscription of the men of Faction should be ended,and there should be a greater distribution of the resources of the palace treasury and of the horses in the Western Garden stables to equip the army.
Now that Cao Cao's army isretreating, his men will be thinking of going back to their homes. Ifwe go out and surprise him before he is across [the Yellow River]we can totally upset him. We must not miss this chance."
The remnants of Zhang Mancheng's party elected Zhao Hong as their leader, and their strength increased once more until they were over a hundred thousand. They occupied Wan city.
"The best thing is to let the army halt for a time and build up morale. Make your rewards clear and your punishments certain. When you take pressure off the rebels in such a fashion, they are sure to say to themselves that we are afraid of them. Such evil men will certainly struggle for power, and they will soon be quarrelling amongst themselves.
The Commandant of Cavalry Cao Xiu said, "If the enemy had really cut the road, they would have hidden their troops and moved in secret. Since we have heard of the threat, it is clear they have not done so.
The Consultant Dong Zhao noted that Yang Feng had a strongforce of foot-soldiers and horsemen, but few supporters at court. Hewrote to him on Cao Cao's behalf, saying, "Knowing yourreputation and admiring your fine deeds, I offer my full and sincerefriendship. You have saved the emperor from his difficulties andhave returned his court to the old capital. No-one else can matchyour achievement in his support. How splendid!
In the sixth month there was a plague of caterpillars in Hongnong and the Three Adjuncts.
Seeking to return to the palace, Min Gong helped the emperor and the King of Chenliu to go southwards on foot by night, guided only by the light of the stars. After several li they obtained a commoner's open cart and rode in it together as far as Luoshe.On the day xinwei [25 Sep] the emperor rode by himself on one horse, the King of Chenliu and Min Gong rode together on another, and they travelled south from Luoshe until some of the excellencies and ministers came to meet them.
Then Zhang Liao, alone and without escort, went up SangongHill to Chang Xi's house and paid respects to his wife and children.Chang Xi was pleased and he went with Zhang Liao to Cao Cao.
Yuan Shao'sofficer Meng Dai argued, "Shen Pei has a position of specialauthority and he belongs to a powerful clan. Now that his sons arein the south he will certainly plan to rebel."
Zhang Huan was formerly on good terms with the Su family, but Duan Jiong had been a close friend of Li Gao. Duan Jiong appointed Su Buwei [to his own staff] as Assistant Officer to the Director of Retainers, but Su Buwei was afraid; he claimed to be ill and would not go.
Huang Zu fled and they chased him and cut off his head. Several ten thousand men and women were taken prisoner.
"Yuan Shao has many plans but makes few decisions; he letsthings slip and acts too late. When you make a plan you takeaction quickly and you can always cope with a changingsituation. This is superior strategy.
"Cao Cao is skilled at using soldiers and many of the worthyand brave men turn to him. He will certainly defeat Yuan Shao. Ifhe then turns his men towards the Yangzi and the Han we fear thatyou will not be able to deal with him.
He Jin now controlled the government. He was angry at Jian Shi for plotting against him, and made secret plans to kill him.
and he led his army back. He set a large wooden sign by the water at the side of the road, saying: "It is the middle of summer, and the road is impassable. We are waiting for autumn or winter to resume the advance."
The Excellency over the Masses Zhao Wen sent a letter to Li Jue saying, "You began with massacre and looting in the imperial city, and you slaughtered the great ministers. Then you quarrelled over some trivial insult and have made it a battle of life and death.
Zhao Zhong said, "This is the time that the question must be settled."
Everyone thought that Cao Cao and Zhang Miao were close friends, and they considered Gao Rou too young, so they would not follow his suggestion.
When Gaozu first came to power, he sent Li Shang on a special mission to settle the lands west of the Long Mountain. When the Epochal Exemplar [Emperor Wu] held the government, he established four commanderies in that region, and all agreed that this was like cutting off the right arm of the Xiongnu.
Liu Yu could not control him, and he had a courier take a memorial to the emperor setting out [Gongsun Zan's] crimes of cruelty and robbery. Gongsun Zan for his partcomplained that Liu Yu was did not send adequate supplies.
he recommended that he be arrested, sent to prison and impeached fortreason.
Cao Cao said, "Lu Bu had gained the province in a single day. What he should have done then was seize Dongping and cut the roads through Kangfu and Taishan, holding the passes and strategic points against me. Instead, he simply stayed in camp at Puyang. Now I know he is incompetent."
Dong Cheng and Zhang Yang wanted to have the emperor return to Luoyang, but Yang Feng and Li Le would not agree. All the generals were now suspicious of one another.
Now send them a message saying just what they expect: that Jing province isin danger and you want to go to help there. Start packing andpretend you are leaving.
With all the empire itis the same, not just you. Have no fear." Zu Lang kowtowed and made his peace, and they broke hisfetters and had him act as Chief of Police at the Gate.
"Be quiet," ordered Sun Ce. "I have thought it outit carefully.
Zuo Chang was angry, and he sent He Xun with the Attendant Officials Xin Zeng and Kong Chang to make a separate camp and face the rebels near Ayang. He expected He Xun to make mistakes in military affairs and he would then be able to punish him, but He Xun instead fought a series of successful engagements.
The Minister of the Guards, Xu Xu of Yingchuan, became Excellency over the Masses.
however, has not long held command ofYuan Shao's soldiers and he has yet not had time to get the bestfrom them. If we attack we can defeat him."
Then LiuQi died, and Sun Quan had Liu Bei take over as Governor of Jingprovince. Zhou Yu handed over all the territory south of theYangzi to Liu Bei.
"You hold an independent command, but you have no intentionof attacking those bandits. In similar circumstances, Zhao Dun wasrecorded as the murderer of his master.
Sun Quan's mother the Lady Wu was seriously ill. She called Zhang Zhao and others to her, and entrusted them with the future of the state. And so she died.
Fa Zheng observed to Liu Bei, "Cao Cao forced Zhang Lu to surrender and settled Hanzhong with a single blow, but he [516] failed tofollow up that advantage by invading Ba and Shu. All he has done is leave Xiahou Yuan and Zhang He to guard the place, while he himself suddenly goes back to the north. It is not that he is foolish or that he is too weak. He must have some hidden cause for anxiety.
Chen Wen of Runan, the Inspector of Yang province, died. Yuan Shao sent Yuan Yi to replace him, but Yuan Shu attacked Yuan Yi and defeated him.
Quite simply, I am afraid I should beharmed as soon as I left the protection of my troops; and I want toarrange that even my children and grandchildren shall be secure.
An edict ordered that troops of the Southern Xiongnu be sent to help Liu Yu attack Zhang Chun, and the Shanyu Qiangqu sent the Worthy King of the Left to lead cavalry into You province.
Liu Bei and Sun Quan may appear to be close allies, but they have private disagreements. Guan Yu has ambitions, and Sun Quan will never allow him to achieve them.
and someone suggested he should occupy Xu province and then return to deal with Lu Bu.
Hu Cai and Li Le had stayed in Hedong. Hu Cai was killed in afeud and Li Le died of illness.
"Great teachers of the past always put emphasis on followinghuman nature.
Cao Cao was sorry for him, and addressed him by his style, "Zhongye, you are truly a loyal servant."
If you use him, tell him to stay very quiet, but to make secret reconnaissance. Then we can win."
In the summer, in the fourth month Liu Yu, Governor of You province, was named Grand Tutor. The roads were blocked, however, and the letter of authority never reached him.
Guo Jia encouraged Cao Cao to appoint many of the famousscholars of Qing, Ji, You and Bing as clerical officers to increasesupport for his regime among the people, and Cao Cao did this.
Sun Ce said to him, "Your reputation forvirtue has long been respected and people everywhere admire you. Iam still young, and should act as a son or younger brother."
From this, there appeared popular ditties in the two commanderies: The Administrator of Runan is Fan Mengbo, Zong Zi of Nanyang is no more than a cipher;
Though Ni Heng had not actually said this, it was an accuratecriticism of Liu Biao,
When Cao Cao saw how well-organised were Sun Quan's ships,equipment, weapons and troops, he sighed and said, "A man's sonsshould be like Sun Zhongmou. When they are like Liu Jingsheng'schildren [Liu Biao's sons Zong and Qi], they are no more thanpiglets or puppies." Sun Quan sent a message to Cao Cao, "The spring floods arerising. You had better get away."
Yuan Shang had previously sent his Assistant Officer Qian Zhao ofAnping to go to Shangdang and arrange supplies for his army.Before he could get back, however, Yuan Shang had fled to Zhong shan. Qian Zhao suggested to Gao Gan that he bring the troops ofBing province to receive Yuan Shang, and join forces to watchevents. Gao Gan refused,
They will be, replied Zhou Yu. "Just watch me deal with him."
but Cao Caogave handsome rewards, saying, "When I set out on that expedition, I took risks in the hope of good results.
As Ma Midi's body was brought back to the capital,45 the assembledcourt intended to grant him additional honours.
Before this, when Cao Cao heard that Tian Feng had notaccompanied the campaign, he was pleased and said, "Yuan Shaowill certainly be defeated."
In Bing province recently, year after year there have been floods,and plagues of insects have followed one upon the other. The farmlands have fallen into wilderness, and the tax returns are dwindling to nothing.
I ask that the Inspector of Jing province be given powers equivalent to those of the Director of Retainers, and that my position be the same as the Attendant for Officials at the Capital."
Zhang Ji led troops from inside the passes into the borders of Jingprovince and attacked Rang city.54 He was hit by a random arrowand died.
The men whom he trusts with office and treats as his friends are no more than persuasive flatterers. Those whom he favours andhonours are none but the kinfolk of his empress or of his various concubines. They burn up the riches of the empire and they cut the bone and marrow from living people.
Yuan Shao sent only light troops to aid Chunyu Qiong and usedhis main force to attack Cao Cao's camp. They could not capture it.
In the winter, in the tenth month the Grand Prolonger of Autumn Cao Jie followed this up by arranging that senior ministers sent in a memorial saying, "We request that instructions be sent down to the provinces and commanderies that they should arrest and punish all the men allied in faction, being the former Excellency of Works Yu Fang, together with Li Ying, Du Mi, Zhu Yu, Xun Yi, Zhai Chao, Liu Ru, Fan Pang and their colleagues."
Dong Zhuo's younger brother Min, [his nephew] Huang and other members of the clan were in Mei, and they were all cut down or shot and killed by the men of their command.
Zhang Zi the Admini- strator of Nanyang refused to grant them supplies, but Sun Jian tricked him and took off his head.In the commandery there was fear and trembling, and he was given everything he asked for.
"If Yuan Shao sees a man who is hungry or cold, he pitieshim and it shows on his face, but he deals only with things hecan see. You sometimes neglect small things before your eyes,but when it comes to great matters concerning the people of allthe empire, then you extend your grace and your providence isbeyond expectation. You cannot see everything, but yourconsideration is always thorough and complete. This is superiorhuman feeling.
"Han Xian and Yang Feng have only recently joined YuanShu," replied Chen Gui. "They have not had time to prepare anyplans, so they will not work well together. My son Chen Deng hasobserved them, and he says they are like chickens that cannot sharethe same perch. We can separate them."
You could thenclaim that all your actions were in response to imperial orders, andby that means you would command all within the four seas. That isthe perfect arrangement.
Xia Fang was known for his authority and his gentleness.In the winter, in the eleventh month, more than twenty thousand of the rebels in Rinan came together to him and surrendered.
and you are respected by all within the seas.
When Dou Wu came to authority, he appointed many worthy scholars, he kept himself pure and he drove out corruption, no bribes or presents were passed around,
Li Le, extremely concerned, proposed the emperor take a boat past Dizhu and out by the Meng Crossing.
So Cao Cao sent Cao Hong, General of the Household WhoManifests Firmness, to lead troops [195] west and receive the Sonof Heaven. Dong Cheng and the others, however, held the passesagainst him, and Cao Hong could not get through.
He also attacked Yuan Shang's officer Ju Gu at Handan and seizedthat city.
Then Liu Bei seized those three commanderies, Liu Ba's work was undone, and he planned to go back to the capital district by way of Jiao province.
"All you have to do is coin Zhibo money, hold down prices, and order your officers to set up official monopolies."
When the funeral rites were completed, however, Zhao Bao said to the men of his district, "It would not be loyal for a man to accept a salary but avoid the difficulties of office. It is quite unfilial, however, for a man to cause the death of his mother in order to maintain his own position of honour.
Cao Zhi had married a daughter of Cui Yan's elder brother.
He was there for two years, and then Fan Pang and his colleagues were indeed involved in the misfortunes of the Proscribed Party. Shentu Pan was the only one who was preserved from the inquisition.
In the spring in the second month on the day bingxu [?] the Loyal Marquis of Kang District, Huang Qiong, died.
Liu Bei threw a hand-axe at him, saying, "Zilong would never desert me."
It is the cries of misery from the people that bring down disasters from nature. The renegade barbarians, cruel and violent, take advantage of our weak position to behave disobediently on the slightest pretext.The stores and supplies are exhausted for the mouths of these wildcats and wolves,and all the labour and effort of the past are gone for nothing.This is because the leaders and commanders are not truly loyal, and a host of wicked men has gathered here.
As Zhang Xiu was in pursuit of Cao Cao, Jia Xu stopped himand said, "You must not go after him. If you chase him you willcertainly be defeated."
He attacked the camps in the Yangping hills, but the slopes were steep and difficult to climb and they failed to take them on the first assault. Many soldiers were killed or wounded, and supplies for the army were exhausted. Cao Cao's plans were spoilt, and all he had left to do was draw back his men, leave a defence line behind him, and retreat. He sent his General-in-Chief Xiahou Dun and the General Xu Chu to call the soldiers from the hills.
When Dong Zhuo first came to the capital he had only three thousand foot-soldiers and horsemen, and he was concerned they might be too few to establish wide respect. Over the first few days, therefore, he had his men go out quietly each night to camp nearby, returning at dawn in a great array of flags and drums to look as if more troops had come from the west. No-one at Luoyang saw through the trick,
"Now, salt is the great treasure of the state, but since therebellion it has been left untended. You should appoint commission ers to supervise its sale as in former times, and use the profit tobuy ploughs and cattle so that we can give them to the people asthey return. If we [258] encourage farming, then grain can becollected to make the land prosper. When people hear about it faraway, we can be sure that they will travel day and night in order toreturn as quickly as possible.
In such a situation, how can I stand and face the world?" He vomited blood and died.
CaoCao went forward and besieged him again. As their forces engaged,Yuan Shang's officers Ma Yan, Zhang Yi and others came tosurrender. Yuan Shang's troops were utterly scattered and he fled toZhongshan. T
The Shanyue hills people of Danyang commandery besieged the Administrator Chen Yin. Chen Yin attacked and defeated them.
Cai Yong advised as follows: "Military campaigns of punishment have been carried out since ancient times, and they are always important.
Guan Yu was touched. He realised his error, and he bowed at once to accept the appointment.
Jiang Gong, however, refused to accept the goods;he treated the bandits generously with wine and food, and then sent them away.
"Ten paces!" they said.
With one blow you cut off an arm of the Yuanclan and free a whole district from peril. Lord Cao will surely begrateful, and nothing could rival your fine reputation."
Wu of WEI [Cao Cao] was cruel and strong, with great achievements in the empire, and he long planned to be his own master. Even to death, however, he dared not do away with Han and set himself upon the throne. That was surely what he wanted, but he still respected the honour of the name, and curbed himself.
Wei Zhu lived in seclusion and taught.He paid no attention to the concerns of the world.
In the autumn, in the seventh month Duke Cao of WEI came to Yangping.
Zhao Zhong smiled and said, "It would be appropriate for Minister Chen to present a written justification of that statement."
f you harm him, the whole country will be disturbed."
but Zheng Mao from the same commandery, a son of Zheng Tai,warned him on several occasions, "Wei Feng is a master of deceit. He will surely cause trouble."
If Chunyu Qiong and the others aretaken then we shall all be captives."
The office of Inspector should be changed to Governor, and strong ministers of good reputation should be selected to occupy these posts."
Now Dou Wu and Chen Fan were loyal and upright, but they did not receive your imperial clemency, and that is the source of these evil omens. As a matter of urgency,
King Qiao of the Wuhuan now brought his tribesmen, and with a further seven thousand horsemen from the Xianbi [Yan Rou and his allies] followed Xianyu Fu south to join Liu Yu's son He and Yuan Shao's officer Qu Yi.The combined armies, a hundred thousand men, attacked Gongsun Zan and defeated him at Baoqiu. They took more than twenty thousand heads.
In the second month on the day renchen [17 Mar] there was a fire in the Arsenal.
Zou Tuo and Qian Tong of Wucheng, Wang Sheng of Jiaxingand other leaders each collected thousands of men, some as many asten thousand, and refused to submit to Sun Ce.
An edict re-appointed Chen Fan as Minister of the Household, while Yang Bing became Intendant of Henan.
Wang Yun had always regarded Lü Bu simply as a fighting man, but Lü Bu was proud, and boasted of his achievements. After he had been disappointed he began to look discontented.
He had already prepared a chariot with an escort of cavalry, but Tian Chou said, "The roads are blocked and there are robbers and bandits everywhere. If you give me an official commission, everyone will notice me.
On the day bingzi [30 Sep] Dong Zhuo had the Dowager He killed by poison. The excellencies, ministers and lower officials did not wear linen clothes [to court], and her burial ceremony was carried out simply in white clothing.
When Liu Bei was in Yu province before [as Inspector in 194], hehad recommended Yuan Huan of Chen commandery as AbundantTalent.
the Annals of Emperor Xian.Jian'an 11: 206 AD 27 Jamuary 206 - 14 February 207
Cao Hong was suspicious and was reluctant to receive them,but Xun You said, "Zhang He's plan was rejected. He is angry andhe has come away. How can you have doubts?"
Now that Liu Bei had taken Yi province, Sun Quan sent Zhuge Jin, his Major at Headquarters, to ask Liu Bei to hand back the com- manderies of Jing province.
and theywill certainly fight to the death. If we attack them without successthere will be no end of trouble. If we attack them and win, wedestroy the people of a whole commandery.
They went in and sat down, and Xu You said, "Yuan has astrong army, how can you withstand him? And what supplies haveyou?"
but they could notgive him enough. Liu Xie urged Liu Xun to attack them.
Zhang Rang brought complaint to the emperor, and the emperor summoned Li Ying and reprimanded him for not having asked permission before carrying out the execution.
On the day renzi [27 Sep] the Palace Counsellor Kong Rong suffered public execution.
At this time, those who had been implicated in the Faction Incident and taken into prison were all the most celebrated and worthy men of the empire.
When Chen Fan and Dou Wu came to power, Li Ying and the others were chosen once more for office, but when their patrons were destroyed they were again dismissed.
"If I die," said Fan Pang, "then the misfortune is ended. How can I involve you in my punishment,
Chen Fan, [now] Minister Herald, sent in a memorial saying, "Though Li Yun's words have no regard for proper form and deference, are opposed to higher authority and disobey orders, nevertheless he did have the good intention of showing loyalty to the state.
Humu Ban, Wu Xiu and Wang Gui came to Henei. Yuan Shao sent Wang Kuang to kill them all.
Zhao Yan, was made Protector of the Army Within the Passes and ordered to raise twelve hundred soldiers to help in the defence of Hanzhong.
but Liu Qi was furious and threw the seal on the ground. He intended to go back for the funeral and use the occasion to make trouble,
In the winter, in the tenth month Cao Cao came to Liyang.
Chen Gong by nature was upright, strong and impetuous. He too felt unsure of his position, and with the Gentlemen of the General Staff Xu Si and Wang Kai, and Zhang Miao's younger brother Chao, he made plans to rebel against Cao Cao.
Liu Bei's combined forcewas over thirty thousand men, and he had most adequate quantitiesof armour, equipment and supplies.
Cao Cao released Han Song from prison, treated him with the courtesy of a personal friend, and had him make gradings of the good and the bad officials of the province. All his nominees were appointed.
Han Song was made Minister Herald, Kuai Yue became Minister of the Household, Liu Xian became a Master of Writing and Deng Xi became a Palace Attendant.
As a result of this, Cao Jie, Zhu Yu and their fellows regained some of their influence and power,
Now Cao Caoholds the emperor and so gives orders to the empire. If you raise anarmy against the south, you put yourself in the wrong.
"Your advisers observe that Cao Cao was unsuccessful at the Red Cliffs, so they argue that his power is in decline and that he no longer holds any ambition for more distant regions.
"Yang Huai and Gao Pei are notable officers under Liu Zhang,and each commands a strong force at the head of the [Boshui]Pass. I have heard that they have written several times in protest toLiu Zhang, urging him to send you back to Jing province.
The troops of the Director of Retainers and the Intendant of Henan came and surrounded Qiao Xuan's house, but dared not move against the criminals [for fear of endangering the child].
In the second month there was a comet in the Purple Palace Enclosure.1
and the local officials left their cities and fled into the mountains and wilderness.
A few days later Cao Cao sent Han Sui a letter, with manycharacters struck out and changed, as if Han Sui had altered it, andMa Chao and the others became still more doubtful of him.
but Chang Lin the Officer of Merit said, "Theofficers and people of the north love peace and are weary ofdisorder. They have long accepted our government, and the majorityof them are loyal.
The three commanders were brought to prison by cage cart, paid ransom and became commoners.
Tian Yin and Su Bo are like dogs and sheepflocking together in packs: they can never be a real danger.
After Xiahou Yuan and Liu Bei had faced one another for more than a year, Liu Bei came from Yangping and crossed the Mian River to the south. He climbed the hills, brought his army a little further forward, then made camp at Dingjun Mountain.
"Dong Zhuo, moreover is cruel and perverse. He has no loyal friends, and his troops will not follow him.
Through your spiritual warfare and heroic talents, building on the great achievements of your father and your brother, you control the east of the Yangzi, with territory of several thousand li, welltrained soldiers, good supplies, and men glad to serve you. You should march across the empire and act for the house of Han, doing away with oppression and driving out disgrace."Cao Cao, moreover, brings on his own destruction. Why should you surrender to him?
Cao Cao had relied on reports from Assistant Officers of Liang province and from men surrendered in Wudu, who had told him that "It is easy to attack Zhang Lu. The mountain ridges north and south ofYangping are a long way apart, and the pass is indefensible." Cao Cao believed them,
The Registrar was sent to receive Zhang Xi, and three sets ofmessengers were despatched,
Now the emperor is rich in years, and he has not yet shown the empire anything less than perfection.
Yuan Shao gained people's affections by hisleniency, and if his two sons can agree and maintain the inheritancethey will be a source of endless trouble.
The Minister of Ceremonies Chen Dan of Donghai became Grand Commandant.
"I have heard that there are five or six thousand chosen concubines in the imperial harem, with another host of attendants and escorts besides. Innocent people are being exhausted with the taxation required to support these useless women: ordinary people throughout the empire are in desperate poverty while the Yin and Yang are isolated within the palace. For these reasons, the spirits of harmony are affected, and disasters and strange omens arrive one after another, with serious effect.
Dam the source, and the furthest end of the stream will cease to flow: surely this is the meaning of it!
Once you have tipped out water, you cannot collect it again. Think hard about it, then make peace with the eunuchs."
Cao Cao cautioned him, "We live at home as father and son, but we attend to affairs as ruler and subject. If anything goes wrong, I shall punish you in accordance with the royal law. Be careful."
In considerable anxiety and distress, Shan Kuang gave money to his retainer Ren Fang to kill Wei Yu.
Tian Heng was a single man from Qi, replied Zhuge Liang, "but he protected his honour and refused to disgrace himself.Liu Yuzhou is a descendant of the royal house, his courage and ability are known through all the world, and he is respected and admired by the people and the gentry as naturally as water returns to the sea.
He Miao spoke to He Jin and said, "When we first came from Nanyang we were all of us poor, and it was through the eunuchs of the inner palace that we came to wealth and honour. In affairs of state, how can you act so hastily?
Soon after this, the armies at Suanzao ran out of food and the allied forces dispersed.
His younger brother JuZong said, "Cao Cao's men and horses are no match for ours. Whyare you afraid?"
Now that Yuan Shao had overcome Gongsun Zan he became stillmore proud and confident, and his tribute to the emperor was in frequent and small.
On the day jiwei [29 Jun] there was an amnesty for the empire.Li Jue was made General Who Manifests Firmness, and Guo Si General Who Manifests Courage. Fan Chou and the others all became Generals of the Household.
Then Yang Bing [also] sent in reports on governors and administrators [in the provinces].The Inspector of Qing province, Yang Liang, and more than fifty other men were either put to death or dismissed from office.Everyone in the empire was impressed.
Chen Fan sent in a memorial, "Now the capital district is in turmoil and the streets are full of shouting and hubbub.People say that Hou Lan and Cao Jie, Gongcheng Xin, Wang Fu and Zheng Li, together with the Lady Zhao [Rao the wet-nurse] and other members of the harem staff are bringing the empire into disorder. Those who support this group rise and prosper, those who oppose them come to harm. The ministers at court are like trees in the Yellow River, drifting east or west. They do nothing but draw their salaries and seek to avoid trouble.
Gongsun Zan sent Liu Bei to accompany Tian Kai in the attack on Qing province. He did well and was made Chancellor of Pingyuan.
Liu Bei said, "As Liu Jingzhou was dying, he entrusted his orphans to me. I cannot turn from this obligation and seek my own advantage. When I die, how could I show my face to Liu Jingzhou?"
If menmust be pure to hold office, how could Duke Huan of Qi havebecome hegemon? Everyone must help me bring to light thehumble and obscure. Please recommend men simply on the basis oftheir ability; I can make use of them."
The men stood fast and made no move, but they all cried out, "Ten thousand years!"
He lit a fire in the night as a signal to the city, and thepeople in the city lit another fire in reply.
About this time, however, the faction affair was somewhat eased, and Shi Bi was able to buy his way out of the accusation by submitting money for redemption.
Xu You said, "Cao Cao has few soldiers, and he has brought hiswhole army to face us [at Guandu]. There cannot be many of hismen left at Xu city.
Later, when Liu Bei went west to attack Liu Zhang, Sun Quan said, "Cunning slave, that he should dare a trick like this!"
The General of the Household Lü Bu was expert with the bow and with a horse, and stronger than other men. Dong Zhuo treated men insolently, and he knew that they resented him, so he had Lü Bu accompany him everywhere as a guard. He loved and trusted him completely, and they took oath as father and son.
Sun Quan clapped him on the back and replied "Gongjin, you put things just the way I hoped.
Tang Heng replied, "The Regular Attendant Shan Chao and the Secretarial Attendant Zuo Guan had a quarrel with Liang Buyi.TheRegular Attendant Xu Huang and the Prefect of the Yellow Gates Ju Yuan have often expressed themselves privately about the way in which the empress's clan have acted against the law, but they do not dare to speak out."
Lu Zhi of Zhuo commandery sent a letter to Dou Wu: "Your relationship to the court of Han is like that of Dan [the Duke of Zhou] and Shi [the Duke of Shao] to the house of Zhou.You have set a sage ruler upon the throne, and now all the world has a centre to rely upon. Those who consider the matter regard this as your most significant achievement so far.
Later, the Excellency over the Masses Yuan Wei wanted to find a husband for his niece. When he saw Huang Yun, he sighed and said, "If only I had a son-in-law like him, that would be ideal."
When Cao Cao learntof the advice Cheng Yu had given he was extremely pleased andsaid, "Not only do you understand military affairs, you are alsoexpert in dealing between a father and his son!"
The loyalman has no match, but the proud are soon defeated.
Before this, when Huang Qiong was maintaining private tuition at his own home,
As soon ashe left, however, Zhao Qu and Liang Kuan barred the gates of thecity and killed all his family.
Liu Bei told Cao Cao what Zang Ba had said. Cao Cao sighedin admiration and replied to Zang Ba, "This is the conduct ofancient times, and you maintain it still. That is the way I would wishto behave."
Huang Zu sent his son She with a fleet and five thousand mento help Liu Xun, but Sun Ce attacked again and completely defeatedhim. Liu Xun went north to Cao Cao and Huang She also fled. [263]
Cao Cao's officers asked him, "When we first arrived, the enemy were holding the Tong Pass, but they had no defencepositions along the route north of the Wei. You did not go throughHedong to attack [Zuo]pingyi, but instead you halted at the pass,and it was some time before you crossed to the north. Why wasthat?" "The enemy were holding the Tong Pass," replied Cao Cao. "Had I gone into Hedong immediately they would certainly have sent guards back to cover every crossing, and I could never have got over to the west of the River. "So I reinforced the troops facing the pass. The enemy were all concerned about the south, so they left the west of the River undefended, and just two officers [Xu Huang and Zhu Ling] were sufficient to take that position [and form a bridgehead at Puban].
Zhuge Liang was at this time in Linzheng, and he wrote to call him, but Liu Ba refused to come and Liu Bei was extremely annoyed.
Liu Bei led his troops away. As he passed by Xiangyang he rode fast on horseback to call out to Liu Zong, but Liu Zong was afraid and would not show himself.
"You were loyal to the Yuan," said Cao Cao. "How else couldyou have behaved?"
and Jianwei, while Zhang Fei took Baxi and Deyang,
So Li Jue and Guo Si made a generous reply.
Lü Meng replied, "Lu Xun thinks deep and far, and he could bear heavy responsibility. I have seen how he plans things: he will be able to hold great office. But he is not yet well known, so Guan Yu will pay him small concern. He would be quite the best choice.
Now, while you are still occupied with SHU, just leave them to fight. Like Bian Zhuangzi destroying tigers, you cansit and wait until they are worn out."
Zhang Rang, Duan Gui and the others now composed an edict, appointing the former Grand Commandant Fan Ling as Director of Retainers and the Minister Steward Xu Xiang as Intendant of Henan.
How can weabandon good work just as it is on the point of success, and earnourselves a name for dishonour?"
You may look north [to Liu Yu], but I turn west [to the emperor at Chang'an]."
Zhi Xi of Jingzhao, a friend of Kong Rong, had often warnedhim that he held his principles too firmly, that this would certainly bring him suffering, and he would regret it.
Now, however, death by flogging has taken the place of a lessfatal punishment. This shows respect for a man's limbs, but little forhis life."
The Registrar Huang Quan of Baxi objected, "Liu the Generalof the Left has a great reputation for bravery, [430] and you are inviting him here. You will never satisfy his ambition if you treathim as a subordinate, but if you behave towards him as your guestand equal, it will be difficult for a single state to hold two lords. T
In consideration of the favour that you showed my father, I wish to offer my services. Honourable Commissioner, please examine my sincere request."Yuan Shu was most impressed, but he was not prepared to give Sun Ce back his father's troops. He said to him, "I have appointed your worthy uncle as Administrator of Danyang, and your excellent cousin Boyang [Sun Pen] is Commandant. That is the place of the best soldiers. Go back there to join them and recruit your own men."
Cao Cao chose good men as aides for all his sons, and he appointed Xing Yong as Assistant of the Household to Cao Zhi. Xing Yong was punctilious on matters of ceremony,
"Again, some little time ago Filial Sons of the Mound of Comprehension were made Members of the Suite of the Heir- Apparent. I have heard that Emperor Xiaowen ordered the period of mourning [at his death] should extend to only thirty-six days. Even rulers who have succeeded to his position, and those with the intimate connection of father and son, and the excellencies and ministers and the other ranks of officials who had received most generous favour, all bow to his wishes and dare not exceed the limits that he set.
Before this, Duke Cao of WEI had pursued Ma Chao to Anding, butthen he heard that Tian Yin and Su Bo had rebelled, and he drew offhis army and went back.
He stood up and bowed to him, then urged him to study.
As Sun Xia fled, Zhu Jun chased him into the Jing Hills of Xi'e, where he defeated him once more and cut off another ten thousand heads.
He said to Zuo Yuan, "In former times, Yan Zhuoju was the great bandit of Liangfu, and Duangan Mu was a broker in Jin.In the end, however, one became a loyal minister of the state of Qi, and the other was a famous worthy of the state of Wei.
?
Their deceit and falsity should be made clear, and they should be sent back to their native villages."
The Intendant of Henan, Zhu Jun, spoke with Dong Zhuo on military matters, but Dong Zhuo cut him short, saying, "In a hundred battles I have gained a hundred victories. I have made my decision. Stop this nonsense or I shall dirty my sword on you."
Liu Xun retreated to Liuyi and askedhelp from Huang Zu.
Moreover, the Yuan clan came from Chen, and was descended from Shun, and yellow took the place of red, and was next in the cycle of power. So he made plans to usurp the throne and rebel against Han.
And as he does so, Yuan Tan willfollow at his heels. Attacking an enemy distressed and desperate,striking a rebel discouraged and weary, with your power it will belike strong wind moving the autumn leaves.
If Liu Bei is a gentleman hewill not be shamed by what you say. If he is a mean fellow, he willsimply return your insults. So the disgrace will lie with you, notwith him.
On the day jiashen [21 Sep] the Excellency of Works Chunyu Jia became Excellency over the Masses while the Household Counsellor Yang Biao became Excellency of Works; they shared control of the Secretariat.
He fled south with a few horsemen, hoping to escape into Jing province, but Wang Yan, Commandant at Shangluo,arrested him and took his head. All Bing province was pacified.
Theleaders of the Yi group, Chen Pu and Zu Shan, with followers numbering twenty thousand families, were camped in the Linli Hills.There were cliffs on four sides that could not be attacked and the army was held there for a full month.
Lu Xun asked for gold, silver and bronze seals with which to bestow temporary appointments on those who came to him. He attacked Zhan Yan and other officers of SHU, and also the great clans of Zigui. All were defeated and surrendered. From start to finish, those killed, captured or brought to submission were numbered by the tens of thousands.
Jian Shi became suspicious and uneasy. He wrote to the Regular Attendants Zhao Zhong, Song Dian and others, "The General-in- Chief and his relatives control the state and usurp authority at court. Now, with the men of Faction in the empire, they plan to kill the attendants of the late Emperor and destroy our people. He is only delaying because I control the guard.
Sun Quan appointed Lü Meng as Administrator of Nan commandery, enfeoffed him as Marquis of Chanling, and awarded him a million cash and five hundred catties of gold.Lu Xun became Administrator of Yidu.
Zhang Liao attacked fiercely, broke the encirclement and made his escape with a few score soldiers still following his standard.
Qin Jie the Administrator of Nanyang killed Han Zhong, and the remaining rebels chose Sun Xia as their leader. He went back to camp in Wan,
Secretly, however, Jia Xu planned to join Zhang Xiu. Someone said,"Duan Wei treats you generously, why should you leave?"
Liu Bei would not agree, however, explaining that, "I am just now making plans for Liang province. When that territory is settled, I shall return you the whole of Jing province."
Before this, Wang Yun had claimed all credit for killing Dong Zhuo, while Shisun Rui would take no reward and rejected a fief as a marquis. So now he escaped misfortune.
Duke Cao of WEI had three of his daughters taken into theemperor's harem as Honoured Ladies.
In the autumn, in the seventh month Liu Xie the King of Bohai was transferred to be King of Chenliu.
Wei Ji wrote to Xun Yu, "The rich lands within the passes havequickly turned to a wilderness, while there are more than a hundredthousand families exiled in Jing province. When these people hearthat their homeland is at peace they will be eager to come back.
Later, however, he opposed the imperial commands, so Lord Cao has taken his place. He is willingto arrange for you to receive title as Shanyu from the proper author ity.
There is no way that a son can dismiss his mother, any more than a subject can dismiss his lord! The dowager must be buried with her late husband in the Xuanling tomb. This will be in full accord with the regulations of former times."
How can they be arrested like this, on no more than the suspicion of wrong-doing and with no proper evidence?"
Gan Ning, Lil Meng and others fought strongly to hold the enemy off Ling Tong led Companions to help Sun Quan break out from the circle, then went back to fight Zhang Liao. All about him were killed and he himself was wounded. When he judged that Sun Quan must have escaped he made his way back.
He went first to Guo Si, and Guo Si accepted the message.Then he went to Li Jue but Li Jue refused, saying, "Guo Duo is nothing but a horse-thieving brigand. How dare he seek to rank with me?
Liu Bei had a few thousand soldiers of his own, but Tao Qian allocated him four thousand more from Danyang, so Liu Bei left Tian Kai and joined Tao Qian. Tao Qian recommended him as Inspector of Yu province and he camped at Xiaopei.
The Han house is in decline, replied Tian Chou, "and people are getting ideas of rebellion. Lord Liu was the one man who never lacked loyalty or honour.
"In former times Gaozong took note of a portent from the crowing of a pheasant, and so he achieved the restoration [of the Shang/Yin dynasty]. At the present day, the spirits of Heaven and Earth are advising you to express your awefUl anger. When Wang Fu and his sons had their heads chopped off, men and women meeting on the road, even strangers, would express their joy as if an enemy of their father or mother had been removed.
Yuan Shao and He Miao then brought their troops to station by the Tower of the Vermilion Bird. They caught Zhao Zhong and some others and cut off their heads.
The offices of the Three Excellencies selected Jia Cong of Dong commandery, magistrate of Jing,to be Inspector of Jiaozhi.
The House of Han is lost. They simply do not recognise the meaning of I see a crow which will rest;But upon whose house?"
She herself had produced no heirs, and when a woman of the palace became pregnant, it was seldom she came to full term.
Sun Ce attacked Lu Kang and captured him. Again, however, Yuan Shu gave the position of Administrator to one of his former officers, Liu Xun. Sun Ce was still more disillusioned.
In the sixth month the Southern Xiongnu, the Wuhuan and the Xianbi invaded the frontier by different [69] routes, and they raided and ravaged nine commanderies along the border.
while The Art of War forbids it, saying this will surely bring the greatest general to his downfall.
When the gruel was ready, he brought it to Guo Tai, but Guo Tai abused him, saying, "If you make gruel for your senior, but add neither care nor respect, it becomes quite inedible." And he tipped it away on the floor.
Wang Fu was confirmed in his recent appointment as Regular Attendant and Prefect of the Yellow Gates.
The emperor asked the Minister of the Imperial Household Yang Ci about the strange appearance of the snake, and Yang Ci sent in a sealed memorial, saying: "Now good things do not come without cause, nor misfortune without reason.
Hao Jie had already fled, but he realised that he was not going to get away.So he took a carriage with a coffin to Liang Ji's gateway, and there he handed in a letter.As the letter was taken inside, Hao Jie took poison and died.By this means, his family was saved.
Sun Ce's officer Lu Fan said to him, "As your army grows larger, your responsibilities become greater each day. There are some items of administration which are still somewhat slack. I wish to act for a time as Chief Controller to help you sort things out." "Ziheng,"
I ask that you maintain my commission just one month more; then I shall certainly bring the wolves and owls to acknowledge their wickedness."
Lu Zhi, General of the Household of the North, had attacked Zhang Jue and defeated him in one battle after another, and had killed or captured more than ten thousand men. Zhang Jue and his followers fled to take refuge in Guangzong.
and Zhang Xiu ledhis forces after him.
and Xu Huang set camp no more than thirty feet from Guan Yu's siege-works.He dug tunnels into the city and shot letters to Cao Ren on arrows, so news and information were exchanged several times.
"At present, Cao Cao is in the north, and our borders have nopeace. Liu Bei is lodging with us, and that is like feeding a tiger.
Every leader with a troop under his command competed for appointment. There was such a great demand for seals, and such a shortage of engravers, that some were scratched with an awl.
He [188] Xun looked up and cursed him, "You dog of a rebel, what do you know about it? Come slay me quickly."
The advisers said, "An army must be controlled by one man.There is no need to ask for approval."
As soon as he came in, however, hekilled them both. He named himself General Who Subdues theWest, with command as Governor of Bing province and Controllerof Military Affairs in Liang province.
Cao Cao was concerned, and he asked Tian Chou about it.
Wang Yun was ordered to take control of the Imperial Secretariat, while Lü Bu became General Who Displays Majesty, held the Staff of Authority,and was treated with the same ceremonial as the three excellencies. He was enfeoffed as Marquis of Wen and shared in the government with Wang Yun.
A special edict was issued to summon Liu Yu in order that he might discuss the evidence of portents and disasters.
Shan Chao and the others said, "Now that your majesty's plans are decided, we shall speak no more on the matter in case we give others some cause for suspicion."
The four marquises who remained [of the five eunuch allies of Emperor Huan against Liang Ji] continued their misrule and disorder.The empire had a saying, Zuo Guan has power to change heaven,Ju Yuan sits in solitary pride,Xu Huang is a sleeping tiger, Tang Heng rains evil upon us.
In the twelfth month Duke Cao ofWEI arrived at Mengjin.
You have the majesty of a dragon or a tiger. Are you prepared to play the role of his Han [Xin] or Peng [Yue]?
6: 183 AD
Xi Zuochi discusses this:There was just one occasion in ancient times that Huan of Qi boasted of his own good work, and nine states turned rebel as a result. For a short time Cao Cao made show of his pride, and so the empire divided into three.
In the autumn, in the seventh month on the day jiazi [miswritten for jiawu = 17 Sep] the emperor came out by the Xuanping Gate. As he was about to cross the bridge, several hundred of Guo Si's men blocked the way and said, "Isn't this the Son of Heaven?"
Later, in the second year of Jianhe (148), when the Qiang made another great invasion, the Banshun people helped us break up their attacks and defeat them.
Sun Quan would not agree, and he sent Sun Yu with a fleet to Xiakou.
As Cao Cao brought his army back to Guandu, Yan Rou sentmessengers to him, and Cao Cao appointed him Protector of theWuhuan.
As imperial letters became steadily more pressing, province and commandery officials would shave the head and bastinado members of their junior staff [in order to extort confessions]. An Assistant Officer from the province came to the guest quarters [at Pingyuan] and complained, "The imperial letters show a particular hatred for the men of Faction, and the instructions are clear and deliberate.
But nowyou are encouraging a pattern of conduct which is difficult, and youuse it to judge all manner of men. When you force things like that, itis not surprising if people become annoyed and irritated.
Liu Bei saw Pang Tong, had excellent conversation with him,and gained a good opinion of his ability. So he appointed him as hisHeadquarters Officer, trusted him and treated him just a little lessfavourably than Zhuge Liang. Pang Tong and Zhuge Liang wereboth appointed Generals of the Household Masters of the Army.
There have been no reports from the provinces or commanderies, so where does Liu Tao get his information?
At first I did not attack because I wanted to avoid their early strength. Now I attack to take advantage of their weakness. What I am attacking is an army that is discouraged, not an army that is in retreat."Moreover, Wang Guo's army is running away and his men have no intention of fighting. With disciplined troops we strike at confused ones; this is no matter of desperate bandits."
Then Zhang Jue set up thirty-six Divisions.
Liu Bei left Guan Yu to hold Jiangling, and Lu Su had borders with Guan Yu's territory. Guan Yu was constantly on guard against treachery, but Lu Su always acted in most friendly fashion.
Sun Ce divided Yuzhang to make Luling commandery. Heappointed Sun Ben as Administrator of Yuzhang and Sun Fu asAdministrator of Luling.
At this time, when Liang Ji had just been overthrown, the people held great expectations of the new government.As head of the bureaucracy, Huang Qiong now sent in a memorial with the names of officials who had made themselves notorious throughout the provinces and commanderies for their oppression and dishonesty.More than a dozen were executed or banished, and all the empire approved.
Then Lü Meng took Lu Su's place and camped at Lukou.48 He believed that Guan Yu had always been an brave fighting man, and that he was intending to take over all the territory. He already controlled the upper reaches of the state,49 and this situation could not be maintained for long.He therefore spoke secretly to Sun Quan, "Order the General Who Subdues the Caitiffs [Sun Jiao] to hold Nan commandery, Pan Zhang to go to Bodi, and send Jiang Qin with ten thousand soldiers raiding up and down the Yangzi, to harass the enemy wherever heturns. Then I shall go forward and occupy Xiangyang for our state. After that, what have we to fear from Cao Cao? And why should we rely upon Guan Yu?"
When Liu Bei went to attack Liu Zhang, he had left the General of the Household Huo Jun of Nan commandery to hold Jiameng city.
Only Zhi Xi went and looked after the body, saying, "If Wenju has left me and is dead, what have I to live for?"
When Liu Zhang, Governor of Yi province, heard that Cao Cao had captured Jing province, he sent his Attendant Officer Zhang Song to pay respects.
Cao Cao appointed Man Chong of Shanyang as Prefect of Xu. Someretainers of Cao Cao's cousin Cao Hong repeatedly disobeyed thelaw in that territory, and Man Chong arrested them and punishedthem. Cao Hong wrote to threaten Man Chong but he paid noattention.
In the sixth month there were earthquakes in Jingzhao, in [You]fufeng, and in Liang province.
28 January 157 - 15 February 158
Then he came as a fugitive to Donglai and stayed at the house of Li Du.
Cao Cao had suspicions about the people in the areas of Jing province which had been over-run [by Guan Yu] and also about those in the military colonies along the Han.He planned to shift all of them.
Liu Qi was worried. He asked Zhuge Liang for advice as to how he might secure his position, but Zhuge Liang refused to answer.
Your servant Sima Guang remarks: Confucius spoke of love for humanity as the matter of utmostimportance.
He gavelarge bribes to establish an alliance with [Liu Biao in] Jing province.
Ma Chao controlled all the forces west of Long Mountain, andZhang Lu sent his high officer Yang Ang to join him. Theircombined array was ten thousand men. They attacked Ji city, andfrom the first month until the eighth there came no relief.
Some, however, said that, "Liu Bei is ambitious. Ifyou don't make plans to deal with him right away, he will certainlycause trouble later."
Taishi Ci indeed came back when he had said he would, and hereported to Sun Ce, "Hua Ziyu is a worthy man, but he has no plansbeyond his own territory. He keeps things going and nothing more.
Wen Chou and Liu Bei, commanders of Yuan Shao's cavalry,came up together with five or six thousand horsemen.
Cao Cao said, however, "I know what sort of manYuan Shao is: his ideas are big, but he has little wisdom; he looksstern, but his courage is slight; he is envious and malicious and hassmall power of command. His soldiers are many but his plans areconfused, his leaders are proud but his government is not united. Though his lands are broad and his supplies are plentiful, that justmakes it more worth while to take him over."
In the winter there was a comet in the Wolf and Bow constellations.
The emperor was afraid of Liang Ji, so he dared not express his anger [against the empress], but he seldom had intercourse with her. The empress became increasingly resentful and angry.
Altogether it was ninety-three days from his first summons to his appointment as an excellency.
so Zhou Yu presented him with a great house beside the road. He went there to pay respects to Sun Ce's mother, and they shared everything together.
Shentu Pan of Chenliu was a man of poor family who had worked as an artisan in lacquer. When Yu Cheng of Yanling [in Yingchuan] was a young man, he was a janitor at his county headquarters. Guo Tai saw them and admired them, and both of them later became celebrated scholars.
Emperor Xiaohe did not cease his gracious treatment of the Lady Dou [after the destruction of Dou Xian],and the people of the time approved his fine conduct.
According to established regulations, men from the border regions were not permitted to migrate inwards. Because of Zhang Huan's particular merits, however, an imperial edict gave him special exemption.
Xu Huang said to Cao Cao, "The Yuan brothers have not yetbeen defeated, and all the cities that are thinking of surrender willlisten carefully for news of how you handle this matter. You shouldgive generous rewards to these two counties generously in order t: encourage the others."
Guan Yu boasts of his courage, said Lu Xun, "and he oppresses others. Having recently gained great success, he now has proud ideas and unbridled ambition. Fully occupied with his attack to the north, he has yet no suspicion of us. When he hears of your illness, he will certainly reduce his guard.
During a career of more than thirty years, Hu Guang had served six emperors and held office in each of the four positions of excellency. He was regarded with great respect and trust, and he never spent a single year out of office before being re-appointed.
"If you move against Ye, for his own preservation Yuan Shangmust go back to guard his base.
The provinces and commanderies have put the whole question under taboo: they compare notes privately but are reluctant to say anything in public.
When Poison Yu heard of it, he abandoned the attack on Dongwuyang and withdrew.
"On the other hand, the court has been homeless and wanderingand has only lately returned to the old capital. Far and near, peoplehave been waiting for this, and all hope they may now gain peace. Ifwe transfer the emperor once more, it will not ease the hearts of thepeople.
Before this, when Cao Cao was in Yan province he had givenappointments to Xu Xi and Mao Hui,
"Cao Cao," observed Liu Bei, "is as different from me as waterfrom fire. Cao Cao is mean where I am generous, Cao Cao is cruelwhere I am kind, Cao Cao is deceitful where I am loyal.
I would have been willing to give some of the food of my parents to a guest but you have your own [mode of conduct]. You must be my companion."
but the Palace Attendant Yang Qi advised against it, "Li Jue knows he is acting like a rebel. He wants to shift Your Majesty to Huangbocheng in Chiyang.11 I beg Your Majesty to tolerate his insolence."
Annoyed not to have been given the command, Zhang Chun made alliance with Zhang Ju, a man from the same commandery, who had at one time been Administrator of Taishan, and with a chieftain of the Wuhuan, Qiuliju. Together they attacked Ji, killing Gongqi Chou the Protector of the Wuhuan, Liu Zheng the Administrator of Youbeiping, and Yang Zhong the Administrator of Liaodong. Their forces now numbered more than a hundred thousand and they set their base at Feiru.
"Yuan Shao acts as a rebel; you serve and obey the emperorand so command the empire. This is superior sense of honour.
In the winter, in the twelfth month the Grand Commandant Duan Jiong left office.
In the summer, in the fourth month on the day bingzi [miswritten for bingwu, 3 May], first of the month, there was an eclipse of the sun.
Liu Biao and Yuan Shao were in close alliance.
For penetrating intelligence and fine erudition, we seldom see his like in China."
Before this, because Guo Yuan's army was so large, all the officerswanted to abandon Pingyang.
"Hou Lan should be removed at once and thrown to the tigers.
Sun Ben, son of Sun Jian's elder brother, led the army back to Yuan Shu, and Yuan Shu again recommended that Sun Ben become Inspector of Yu province.
Then Dou Wu said to the Dowager, "It has been the ancient rule that Yellow Gates officials and Regular Attendants are responsible only for the protection of the doors to the harem apartments and for the control of the emperor's personal treasury and possessions. Yet now we have them involved in the government and holding positions of considerable power. Their relatives and dependents are everywhere, and they abuse their authority with violence and greed.
On the day jiashen [2 Jul?] there was a fire in the office of the Assistant for Salaries of the Palace Treasury.
The Honoured Lady Geng, official mother of Emperor An, died.Liang Ji asked her nephew, the Marquis of Linlü Geng Cheng, for her jewellery.When he refused, Liang Ji became angry and had the family executed, more than ten people.
Though our forces may be strong we shall achieve nothing if the wrong man holds command.
In the twelfth month on the day xinchou [4 Jan 165] the imperial cortege returned to the capital.
After all that expense and waste, the Qiang are still not fully subjugated, and the evil that has been left will grow afresh. Here is the root of the problem.
"If you receive the Son of Heaven, you will have to report everything that you do. If you obey him you lose your independence, but if you disobey you will be opposing the mandate. This is not the best plan."
When this report was sent in [from the office of the Masters of Writing, the Imperial Secretariat], the Regular Attendant Lu Qiang of Henan, concerned that Cai Yong was innocent, offered a strongly- worded appeal on his behalf.
Though we cannot immediately restore all the grades ofthree thousand, these few proposals are suitable for the problemsof the present time, and may be put into practice first.
When Feng Xu and Xu Feng were found out, however, the emperor turned on his eunuch attendants and said, "You always said it was the men of Faction who plotted rebellion, and you had me proscribe them from office and some were executed.
When I consider the cases of Feng Gun, Liu You and Li Ying, who are currently convicts on reduced punishment under the Enclosure of the Left, [then I find that] they have punished or sent in reports on wicked ministers, and in all cases they have acted according to the law.
How will you cut down our numbers and our salaries now?"
Zong Zi shifted his attack to the Clerical Assistant Zhu Ling.
"Now that you have defeated Li Feng and Xue Lan, if part of your army goes east to attack Chen Gong he will certainly not dare to come west. Take that opportunity to have your men bring in the harvest, collect food and store grain: by this one move Lu Bu will be defeated.
containing Part 6 of the reign of Emperor XianJian'an 6: 201 AD
The emperor, however, took into consideration his former good work of quelling banditry when he was Administrator of Jiujiang. He was granted a special pardon and was appointed as a Consultant.
When Yuan Tan first arrived in Qing province, his territory west ofthe Yellow River extended no further than Pingyuan.
Yang Biao said, "Imperial subjects are fighting one another, one man has kidnapped the Son of Heaven while another holds the highest officials hostage. What sort of situation is this?"
When the mother of Xu Shu was held by Lord Cao, Liu Bei sent him back to the north. A man with imperial ambitions should have sympathy with the feelings of a son. Lord Cao, in the same manner, should have sent Ji Yun away.
Cao Jie and his fellows also had Duan Jiong report against Liu Meng on some other grounds, and Liu Meng was sentenced to labour service in the Enclosure of the Left.
Though I would not claim my actions are always faultless, I admire the code of a gentleman: 'If you cannot obtain it by proper means, do not take it at all.'
Cao Cao arrested Kong Rong and killed him, together with his wife and children.
Then Guo Tu and Xin Ping said to Yuan Tan, "It was on ShenPei's advice that your father sent you away and made you heir toyour uncle."
Yuan Shu is neither obedient to Heaven nor faithful tohis men. So when he looked for aid, where could he find it?"
Sun Ce collected more than two thousand of Liu Xun's men anda thousand ships, and went forward again to attack Huang Zu.
Zhuge Liang replied, "Have you never heard how Shensheng stayed inside and so came into danger, while Chong'er went away and saved himself?"
In the summer, in the fourth month Cao Cao came from Chencang through the San Pass and reached Hechi. Doumao, King of the Di, with a following over ten thousand men, relied on the difficulties of the terrain and refused to submit. In the fifth month [Cao Cao's forces] attacked the barbarians and slaughtered them.
In the fifth month the Steward of the Palace of Perpetual Joy Fan Ling of Nanyang became Grand Commandant.In the sixth month he left office.
Then Yuan Shao sent a summons for war to the provinces andcommanderies, listing Cao Cao's crimes and wrong-doing,
Zhang Ji has joined Guo Si. Yang Feng is no more than a leader of the Bobo bandits but even he realises you are in the wrong. You have treated him well, but he will soon be no use to you."
Zhang Huan, the General of the Household Protector of the Xiongnu, sent in a message, "Though the Eastern Qiang have been defeated, it will be difficult to eliminate all their tribes. Duan Jiong is reckless and resolute, but he should consider the fact that he will find it hard to defeat them every time. Now is the time to treat the Qiang leniently, so that we have no worries in the future."
Even if Lord Cao does come," observed Liu Bei, "there is nothing he can do. We have firm hold of the Han River."
Some suggested that if he attacked Liu Zong he could take over Jing province.
Yang Bing now sent in a further memorial, "When I examine the ancient regulations, I find that eunuchs were first used simply as messengers, porters and guards for the inner apartments. Now, however, they receive excessive favour and hold real power.
He recommended Sun Jian as Acting General Who Routs the Caitiffs and Inspector of Yu province.
The Yellow Turbans of Qing province plundered in Yan. Liu Dai was going to attack them, but Bao Xin the Chancellor of Jibei argued, "The bandits number a million and people are frightened. Our officers and men lack fighting spirit and cannot face them.
In the eighth month on the day wuchen [22 Sep] He Jin went to the Palace of Prolonged Joy for an audience with the Dowager, and he asked that the senior eunuchs be executed.
When Ji Ling and the others heard that Lü Bu had come, theygathered their troops and halted.
Dong Zhuo's chariot was adorned like an emperor's. Dong Zhuo would summon the officials of the Three Terraces, Masters of Writing and below, and all went to his offices to report or receive instructions.
So comparingWu of Wei with Gaozu and Guangwu and with Chu and Han, that isjust the embellishment of some historian. How can we know XunYu really spoke that way? This is criticising him for a fault which isnot his.
Chuping 1: 190 AD
Sun Quan rode a swift horse to the bridge of the crossing, but the southern end had broken down, and there was a gap more than ten feet wide. The Inspector of Companions Gu Li was following him. He told Sun Quan to grasp the saddle and reins, while he used a whip to urge on the horse from behind, and so they managed to get across.
The Master of Writing Fu Xuan said to He Kui, "Ding Yi has already brought harm to Mao Jie. You should show him somewhat more respect."
Tong Zhi was sick, [266] and so Sun Fuwent forward and took Luling, leaving Zhou Yu to hold Baqiu.
Yuan Hong was a great-great grandson of Yuan An.He would mortify his flesh as a means to maintain his conduct, and he would respond to no recommendations or summons.
When you visit a man like that you find Pure Conversation to reach the clouds, but when you look at his administration you find rewards and punishments confused, the province bleak and desolate, and everywhere a wasteland.39
If Guan Yu has not yet turned eastwards against us, it is only because of your honour's sage-like intelligence, and because I and others are still here.
Liu Yao fought with Sun Ce, but his men were defeated and fled to Dantu.
When asked why, Gongsun Zan replied,"Those gentlemen think they are all so virtuous that favours come to them by right. They have no gratitude for anything I do."
He also built a fortress at Mei, seventy feet high and seventy feet broad, storing thirty years supply of grain. "If things go well," he said, "I shall be master of the empire. And even if I fail, I can hold out here in comfort until I die of old age."
Can you bring him with you? asked Liu Bei.
On account of Yuan Shao, on the day wuwu [10 May] Dong Zhuo killed the Grand Tutor Yuan Wei, the Minister Coachman Yuan Ji, and their families from babies up, more than fifty people.
The Inspector of Liang province, Guo Hong, was envious of Duan Jiong's success and wanted to share in the merits of the campaign.He delayed Duan Jiong's army and prevented him from going forward.The Auxiliary troops had already been under arms for a long time in their current service;missing their homes they all joined in a mutiny and deserted en masse.
Ziyu was Liang's elder brother Zhuge Jin, who had fled the troubles and gone east of the Yangzi, where he [later]became Chief Clerk to Sun Quan.
During the night, they chose several thousand, had eachcarry a white flag, and sent them off from three gates to surrender.
But then the eunuchs formed a faction amongst themselves and sent in an urgent message with false accusations against Feng Gun.
Liu Bei was camped at the Yangping Pass, faced by Xiahou Yuan, Zhang He and Xu Huang.
In the fifth month on the day dingwei [23 Jun], first of the month, there was an eclipse of the sun.
The barbarians have always acted proudly and wilfully, and too much leniency will make the government slack. When things have become slack and then you try to restore law and order, it brings hatred and rebellion.
When the army returned home, good work was discussed and rewards were given.
"If Yuan Shu defeats Liu Bei, then he willjoin with all the leaders of Mount Tai in the north and I shall besurrounded. I must help Liu Bei."
Jia Xu said, "My proposal was no more than a plan to save our skins. What have I done to deserve a reward?"
Wearing his robes of state, Dong Zhuo rode up in his chariot. His troops lined the road from the camp to the palace, foot-soldiers on theleft and horsemen on the right, with camps and guards all around. Lü Bu and others were ordered to act as escort at the front and rear.
The Regular Attendant Zheng Li and the Palace Attendant of the Yellow Gates Dong Teng had several times been in communication with Liu Kui. Wang Fu spied upon them in secret and then informed Duan Jiong.
His influence spread wide like a net, but the meshes wereextremely loose.
Guo Jia argued, "Your authority makes the empire tremble, butthe northern barbarians are relying upon the fact that they are a long way away. They will certainly not be prepared for you. If we take advantage of their miscalculation and attack them quickly, they can be defeated and destroyed.
"I wish you would take some time to think this over; and allow me to complete my full discussion."
In that case, once he had defeated you he would hurry on toXu city with light-armed troops, leaving his officers to hold the rear.
From Jiaozhi, Liu Ba went to SHU to join Liu Zhang.
Du Ji knewthat the counties would remain loyal to him, so he went out of thecity with a few score horsemen, occupied a strong fort, and set uphis defences. Many of the officials and people held their cities onDu Ji's behalf, and within a few weeks he had gathered more thanfour thousand men.
He wrote a treatise called Changyan, which discussed good and bad government.In summary, it said:"The powerful man who is worthy of the Mandate of Heaven has at first no share in the empire. Since he has no share in the empire, there are fighting men everywhere who rise up against him.
Cao Cao now crossed the Yellow Riverand laid siege to Shequan.
Cao Cao was at Xu city, and was planning to receive [194] the emperor.
The emperor, however, considered that although Xiang Kai's words were extravagant and excessive, he had [77] nonetheless relied in each case upon signs from Heaven and other portents. For this reason he was not executed, but was sent to serve sentence as robber-guard.
Lü Bu saw Cao Cao and said, "This is the day that the empire issettled."
Liu Tuo, grandson of Liu Jian the King of Hejian, became King of Rencheng.
For the first time he sent a Supervisor of the Internuncios to overseethe salt office and had the Director of Retainers set his office atHongnong.
Your servant Sima Guang remarks:The Book of Changes claims: "The superior man of humility and merit will maintain his success to the end and will receive good fortune." Shisun Rui had achievement but did not boast of it, and so he preserved his life. May not that be called wisdom?
The daysand months pass like a stream, and old age will come, but I haveachieved nothing. That is why I am sad."
The Imperial Clerk Liu Dai sent in a memorial to explain the case, and Lu Kang was allowed to retire to his own village.
In the eleventh month the Grand Commandant Cui Lie left office. The Minister of Finance Cao Song was made Grand Commandant.
Then he called up several thousand men from the five regiments of the Northern Army, and they set up camp at the Capital Watch-House. He issued an order to his troops, saying, "The Yellow Gate officials and the Regular Attendants have rebelled. Those who give their utmost strength in our cause will be enfeoffed as marquises and will have rich rewards."
At this time the Regular Attendant Yuan She wanted to obtain support from Yuan Feng and Yuan Wei, firstly because they came from a family of chief ministers, and secondly because they shared the same surname. As a result, the Yuan group became more prosperous and powerful than any others of the time; they were extremely wealthy and extravagant, quite different to any of the other families which had produced officials of excellency rank.
If theruler grants few rewards, it is not because he is ungenerous, butbecause rewards which are given indiscriminately do not encouragegood conduct. If the ruler is sparing in meting out punishment, it isnot because he has pity for the people; but because punishmentsapplied at random do not discourage bad behaviour.
So He Jin made Yuan Shao Director of Retainers, with the Staff of Authority to decide and execute cases on his own,and he appointed his Gentleman in Attendance Wang Yun as Intendant of Henan.
Sun Jian said, "Your excellency, you are the leader of an imperial army and your authority makes the empire tremble. Why must you rely on Dong Zhuo?
Ma Chao held Zhao Ang's son Yue as a hostage. Zhao Ang said tohis wife Yi, "I have made my plans, and they will certainly besuccessful. But what are we to do about Yue?"
Po Qin readily agreed, "I respectfully request your guidance."Later, when Cao Cao brought the emperor to Xu city, Zhao Yansaid to Po Qin, "The General Who Maintains the East in Peace, CaoCao, can certainly save the empire. I know where I am going."
Liu Sheng, a man from the same [Yingchuan] commandery as Du Mi, had also returned to his native region from an official post in Shu commandery. He kept his gates closed and his carriageway shut, and had no contact with anyone.
Yang Biao and Huang Wan were frightened, and went to apologise to Dong Zhuo. Then Dong Zhuo was sorry he had killed the two men, and he recommended that Yang Biao and Huang Wan be restored to office as Household Counsellors.
However, [despite his professed love of idleness] he continued to travel in the region of the capital, and he carried out teaching and instruction without cease.
Song Chong, a man from the same commandery [Taiyuan], who had long admired his virtues and considered there was no-one to equal him since the beginning of Han, urged Guo Tai to take office.
And they constantly enjoy them-selves drinking and feasting, they have taken numbers of women from the Lateral Courts, and within the space of ten days or so their possessions and treasure have increased by the millions. If great ministers can behave in this way, what sort of morality do you call that?
When the emperor summoned Jiang Gong and was refused, he sent orders to Pengcheng for an artist to paint Jiang Gong's likeness.
"When his lordship was at Gongan," replied Zhuge Liang, "in the north he feced the strength of Cao Cao, in the east he was under pressure from Sun Quan, while near at home he was concerned that the Lady Sun would cause trouble in his own house.
Before this, the Lieutenant-General Quan Zong of Wu commandery had sent in a memorial with a plan to defeat Guan Yu. Sun Quan was afraid there might be a leak, so he kept it and made no reply.Later, when Guan Yu had been taken, Sun Quan set out a feast at Gongan. He turned and said to Quan Zong, "You planned this too, and although I did not reply, today's success is also to your credit."
Besides this, ministers who flatter you are only too glad to offer treasures from their private hoards in order to curry favour and gain advancement.
and appointed the ConsultantZhang Ji as Intendant of Jingzhao.
Zhang Wen could not bear to act like that, and he said to Sun Jian, "Go back, or Dong Zhuo will get suspicious."
Now in the frontier regions of the western provinces the soil is poor and barren, and the people turn more and more to banditry and plunder. Houses and farms are in ruins, and though there may still be people living there, they are really no more than dead bones.
Before this, the father of the Regular Attendant Zhang Rang died, and Zhang Rang went back to Yingchuan for the funeral. Though people came from all over the commandery, none of the well-known scholars made an appearance and Zhang Rang was bitterly resentful. Chen Shi was the only person [of that gentry class] who paid his respects at the funeral.
The people of the kingdom were afraid there would be no end to the levy of soldiers, and for this reason the Xiluo of the Right Division rebelled, joined the Chuge barbarians, more than a hundred thousand men altogether, and attacked and killed Qiangju.
The Large Division Leader Ma Yuanyi, with some others, had collected several tens of thousands of men in Jing and Yang provinces, and had arranged a date for a rising at Ye.
There was an amnesty for all the empire and the reign-title was changed from Zhaoning to Yong-Han.
At this he called in Xu Heng and Ju Yuan, and those five settled the agreement.The emperor bit Shan Chao on the arm, drawing blood to make the oath.
The emperor said, "If we are agreed, then, you plan it in secret."
As Cao Cao came out and rejoined his own people the sweat was pouring down his back. From this time he went no more to audience.
Before this, the Palace Attendant Kou Rong, a great-grandson of Kou Xun,41 was a man with a strong sense of moral conduct. There were few people he would have dealings with, so the powerful favourites hated him.
Liu Yan sent in a memorial, "The Rice Rebels have blocked the road and there is no way to get through."
but Cao Cao still wanted to make him a marquis.Tian Chou was an old friend of Xiahou Dun, and so Cao Caosent Xiahou Dun to explain things to him.
Sun Quanbelieved the story, and he promptly burnt his siege-works and wentaway.
Attendant at the Yellow Gates, to see how things were going. Someone told Lu Zhi that he should prepare presents for Zuo Feng when he left, but Lu Zhi refused to do so.
Even if he is not destroyed, we can make himrush back and forth and we are sure to defeat him." Y
Ten thousand li from the imperialcourt, he dominated the province with no rivals to his authority. Ashis prestige rose ever higher, the insignia carried before him inprocession and the guards who escorted him became ever moremagnificent, and all the barbarians feared and served him.
Now they have suffered three years of war, and their bodies are scattered in the wilderness. All this has happened because of me. How can I be easy in my mind?” He open ed the gates and rode out in a carriage with Jian Yong to surrender. His attendants wept.
Suddenly he met with three of Xu Gong's men, and they shothim in the jaw. The escort arrived very soon afterwards, struck themdown and killed them,
Tian Chou sent in a memorial to justify his refusal, and swore he would turn the offer down though his life depended on it.
Zhang He said, "If Lord Cao's best troops have gone he is sureto defeat Chunyu Qiong. When Chunyu Qiong is defeated the affairis lost. I beg to go and help him first."
The leaders in Xiping and Jincheng, Qu Yan, Jiang Shi and others, cut off Han Sui's head and sent it to Cao Cao.
Liu Zhang proposed Liu Bei as Acting Grand Marshal withconcomitant office as Director of Retainers, and Liu Bei for his partproposed Liu Zhang as Acting General-in-Chief Who Maintains theWest in Peace, with command as Governor of Yi province.
Let us promise Sun Quan to keep it quiet, but let the news out privately.
And now [that Venus has] entered the constellations House and Heart, it is a sign there will be no descendants and successors.
The same night that Xiahou Dun arrived, however, he executed several dozen men who had planned rebellion, and the army was settled.
All competed in building splendid and extravagant mansions.Even their servants and retainers rode in carriages drawn by oxen [like imperial officials] and were attended by troops of cavalry.Their brothers and relatives by marriage were given power over provinces and the government of commanderies, and they exploited and oppressed the common people like robbers.Their tyranny covered the empire.It was more than people could bear, and many turned to banditry.
In the twelfth month [miswritten for the eleventh month] on the dayjihai [1 Jan 211] Cao Cao issued an ordinance: "When first I was recommended Filial and Incorrupt, I realised thatI had no reputation as a scholar recluse. I was afraid that the worldwould look upon me as someone of no more than ordinary ability,so I sought to make a name for myself by good work in government. "In Ji'nan, therefore, I destroyed oppression and drove out evil,and my recommendations for appointment or promotion were madewithout bias, against the interests of the [palace eunuch] RegularAttendants.
Liu Bei, recommending Liu Qi as Inspector of Jing province, led his soldiers south to occupy four commanderies. The Administrators of Wuling, Jin Xuan, of Changsha, Han Xuan, of Guiyang, Zhao Fan, and of Lingling, Liu Du, all surrendered,
In the third month the Excellency over the Masses Yuan Pang left office. The Minister Herald Liu He was appointed Excellency over the Masses.
When the funeral cortege of the Thoughtful Empress [Dou] of Emperor Huan was about to move off on its way to the burial, and even as the sacrifices were being offered to the spirit of the road, a fellow in Dong commandery who had stolen another man's wife ran off to join the mourning group. His own county administration was seeking his arrest, and he was eventually captured and punished.
Han Sui asked to see Cao Cao face to face. The two men hadknown one other in the past, and now they met on horseback and talked for a while. There was no mention of military matters, theyspoke only of old times in the capital, [426] joining hands andlaughing in pleasure.
The gates of the fortress were made of iron.Dismissing all his attendants and refusing entrance to any male over seven years old, he lived there with his concubines.
Formerly, when Emperor Ling was a marquis he had been very poor. After he came to the throne he despised Emperor Huan for the fact that he had never managed to accumulate possessions for himself, and had held no money of his own. So Emperor Ling sold offices and took the proceeds in order to establish his own privy purse.
When you go down to see his honour [Sun Quan] you should make good plans."
Lii Meng said to Sun Quan, "The fields at Huan are rich and fine. Once they are brought under cultivation, our enemy's strength is sure to increase. We must destroy them quickly."
So Guo Yuan put Jia Kui in prison at Huguan, shut him in adungeon and closed the top with a cartwheel.
When he received this memorial, the emperor thought of halting the program, but he asked the Palace Attendants Ren Zhi and Yue Song about it. They replied, "In former times the hunting park of King Wen [of Zhou] extended a hundred li, but the people considered it small. The park of King Xuan of Qi was five li, but the people considered it to be large.
As many cities of Ji province rebelled to support Gongsun Zan,
Cao Cao laughed and said, "If I bind a tiger I must bind himtightly,"
Then Du Shang secretly ordered his trusted personal followers to set fire to the camp, and all the treasure was destroyed.
Before this, Yuan Shu had gained Nanyang with a population of several million, but he acted wastefully and plundered at will, and he raised levies without restraint. The people suffered from this and gradually drifted away.
Following this initiative, the Prefect of the Yellow Gates Dong Meng spoke on several occasions about the injustices suffered by the Dowager. The emperor was deeply affected by his arguments,and gave her increasing quantities of supplies and provisions.
The former Administrator of Jiujiang, Bian Rang of Chenliu,had criticised Cao Cao. When Cao Cao heard of it, he killed Bian Rang with his wife and children.
Liu Zong's officer Wang Wei said to him, "Cao Cao has heard that you are surrendering and that Liu Bei has run away. He will certainly relax his precautions, and will come to you with only a light escort.
The hero has no land to fight from, so Yuzhou has fled here.I ask you to measure your strength, and give him a place to defend himself.
Yuan Shu was concerned, and he did not send supplies for the army.
According to the old laws, if the army was on campaign and a soldier deserted, his wife and children were examined with torture.
Sima Yi, Registrar to the Chancellor, said to Cao Cao, "Liu Bei cap tured Liu Zhang by deceit and force, and the people of SHU are not yet attached to him. Now that he is fighting fer away in Jiangling, this is too good a chance to miss.
In the summer, in the fourth month Cao Cao pursued them toYe, and he gathered their wheat harvest.
The emperor also invited Wei Huan of Anyang [in Runan].His fellow villagers encouraged him to go, but Wei Huan said, "Now if I should seek a salary and look for advancement, that would satisfy my personal ambition."
In the time of Duke Huan of Qi, though the house of Zhou wasweak, the situation was not so bad as that Han at the beginning ofthe Jian'an period.
Liu Bei is a hero of the empire. He quarrelled with Cao Cao and went to stay with Liu Biao, but Liu Biao was jealous of his abilities and never gave him an important post.
If they can occupy a position with scarcely one chance in ten thousand of survival,then surely they have the courage to fight to the death.
Yuan Shao claimed the authority to appoint Lü Bu as Director of the Retainers, and sent a strong escort to accompany him. Secretly, however, he planned that his men should kill Lü Bu.
Believing their men were too few to match the enemy, the officers were very doubtful about this plan.
Then Dou Wu called up his close colleague the Director of the Secretariat Yin Xun and they consulted and made plans together.
Wu Ju, however, madeonly a false submission, and secretly opposed him. Bu Zhi had WuJu come to him, then cut his head off. His reputation and authoritymade everyone tremble.
There had been officials and common people who practised the arts of Buddhism since the time of the Yongping period [of Emperor Ming:58-75], 63 but the sovereign himself had never paid attention.
But how can one speak of the attitude of a parent if these people are regarded merely as animals or as grass and brambles; if no thought is taken as to whether or not they are behaving well, if no distinction is made between them, and if they are simply mown down or slaughtered indiscriminately?
The road to the south is narrow and thetrees and bushes are thick. You should not follow him."
"Again, there was an occasion that an edict invited the Consultant Cai Yong to answer questions at the Gate of Metal and Shang.34 Cai Yong did not dare keep his understanding of the Way to himself and allow the state to fall into disorder, so he answered directly and forcefully, criticising honoured ministers and censuring the eunuchs.
"Now Zhang Jue has led a rebellion in Zhao and Wei, and the Yellow Turbans are causing disorder in six provinces. This shows how trouble can begin at home and spread across the world.
The Palace Attendant Chen Qun and others all said,"The fortune of Han has long departed, and the dynasty is now meaningless.
By the time the enemy came after them, the dammed-up stream was so deep that there was no way to cross. He made his way back to [You]fufeng.
The Gentleman of the Palace Dou Wu, a great-great-grandson of Dou Rong, had a daughter who became an Honoured Lady.
"Yuan Shao esteems great ceremony and has fine manners;you show consideration and act naturally. This is superiormoral conduct.
Wu Kuang had been angry at He Miao for his failure to support He Jin [in his intention to attack the eunuchs], and he suspected him of sympathy for the eunuchs. He announced to his troops, therefore, that "The man who killed the General-in-Chief was the General of Chariots and Cavalry [He Miao]. Officers and men, will you not take revenge upon him?"
Cao Cao entered Pingyuan and established a general authorityover all the counties [of that territory].
Later, all those who had run away came back from their hidingplaces.
The Criticism by Xu Zhong says:Jin Yun had no responsibility as a subject to Lord Cao, and his mother was his closest relative. According to moral standards, he should have gone away.
Now there are worthy subjects who have long been kept at a distance, and have received no appointments or positions. On the other hand, you have granted great fiefs to your wet-nurse and to your personal favourites,and the great wind, the rain and the hail may also have appeared for this reason.
"Yuan Shao has all his army at Guandu," replied Xun Yu, "andthat is where he will settle victory and defeat with you.
Zhao Bao wrote in to ask leave to return home for the funeral. The emperor sent messengers of condolence and enfeoffed him as Marquis of Yu.
Then the Lady Xu changed back into her mourning clothes andoffered the heads of Gui Lan and Dai Yuan as sacrifice to the tombof Sun Yi. All the army was shaken and afraid.
Before this, when Yuan Shao was in Ji province he had sent messengers to call the gentry of Runan to join him.
ZhuFu the Inspector of Jiao province was killed by rebel barbarians andthe province and commanderies fell into disorder.
Wu Ju and Lai Gong quarrelled, Wu Ju raised troops to driveLai Gong out, and Lai Gong fled back to Lingling.
Jian'an 9: 204 AD
An edict proclaimed rewards for the successful destruction of Liang Ji.Shan Chao, Xu Huang, Ju Yuan, Zuo Guan and Tang Heng were all made marquises of counties.Shan Chao had the income from twenty thousand households, while Xu Huang and the others each had more than ten thousand households.They were known by the people of the time as "the five marquises".
Chen Deng the Administrator of Guangling had his capital at She yang. When Sun Ce went west to attack Huang Zu, Chen Dengencouraged the remnants of White Tiger Yan's following to maketrouble behind him.
Pang Xi became angry and sent a messenger to Cheng Ji to say,"Unless you obey your Administrator, misfortune will come to yourfamily."
Now the [Chinese] people of our border commanderies are few in number, and they are frequently injured by the Qiang. Yet some people want to allow [the Qiang] to surrender and transfer them to live amongst [the Chinese]. This is like planting brambles and thorns in a good field, or raising venomous snakes inside one's house.
and so he was able to turnweakness into strength and change disorder into good government.Of the ten parts of the empire the Wei had eight.In what respect does the achievement of Xun Yu fall short ofthat of Guan Zhong? Guan Zhong did not die for [Gong]zi Jiu,23 butXun Yu died for the house of Han. So his sense of humanity wassuperior to that of Guan Zhong.
On the day gengwu [24 Aug] the General Who Maintains the East in Peace Zhang Ji arrived from Shan. He wanted to make peace between Li Jue and Guo Si and shift the emperor temporarily to Hongnong.
Dong Zhuo refused to accept the order and continued on into Henan [county]. Chong Shao met him there again, welcomed him courteously, rewarded his men with food and drink, then explained once more that he should withdraw his army.
Cao Cao's army was now weary, and there was sickness. They made an initial attack but gained nothing, and they withdrew to the north of the Yangzi. Zhou Yu and his forces were on the south bank.
In the mean time Wu Jing had been engaged with Fan Neng, Zhang Ying and others, but more than a year had passed and he had not defeated them. Sun Ce said to Yuan Shu, "My family has long had connections in the east. I wish to help my uncle attack Heng- jiang.
Becoming frightened, he abandoned his seal and ribbon of office and fled. When he reached Pingyuan he killed himself.
At this time, the whole of Liang province was in continual disorder and rebellion, and the court had constant need for corvee service and taxes. Cui Lie proposed that Liang province be abandoned,
Many walled cities in Ji province surrendered to Cao Cao.
Kou Rong was afraid he would not escape [this combination of hostility] and he [sought to] go back to the palace to plead his case.
In the autumn, in the seventh month the Xianbi again entered the frontier, and they persuaded the Eastern Qiang to join them in a covenant.
Yuan Shang did come through the western hills. He moved eastto Yangping village, seventeen li from Ye, and set camp by the FuRiver.
At his house he kept a chicken ready broiled, together with an ounce of floss silk which had been soaked in wine, then dried in the sun and wrapped around the bird.He would go to the outer entrance of the tomb, soak the cloth in water so that the fragrance of the wine came out, and present the chicken with a single dou of rice and some white reeds spread underneath it.
King Cao of WEI appointed Pei Qian, Junior Clerk in the Department of Granaries under the Chancellor, as a new Admini strator. He offered him good soldiers,
Fan Pang said to Yin Tao and his companions, "If you follow me like this, it will only add to my misfortunes."
In my humble opinion, all the eunuchs [in such high positions] should be dismissed, and we should return to the system as it was before.We should select gentlemen of virtue from every part of the empire, men who understand matters of state, and they should take the place of the eunuchs [as Regular Attendants].All the people would be affected by your sage influence."
In the spring, in the first month the Xianlian group of the Eastern Qiang besieged Duoxu and plundered Yunyang
Before this time, King Qiuliju of the Wuhuan had died. His sonLouban was young, and his nephew Tadun, a warlike man, took his place and held command of the chieftains Nanlou from Shanggu,Supuyan from Liaodong and Wuyan from Youbeiping.
Wang Fen is an ineffectual fellow, and no fighting man. He is sure to fail."
If Xun Yu had left Emperor Wu of Wei [Cao Cao],22 whom should hehave served?
Hu Shuang held on to the horse and continued his protest.Li Su killed him and rode away.
"To my humble observation, the Minister of Justice Guo Xi is mature, sincere and generous. The Household Counsellor Qiao Xuan is intelligent and upright, and the former Grand Commandant Liu Chong is a person of true loyalty and honesty. These should serve as pillars of the state, and your majesty should regularly consult their opinion.
On the day yimao [miswritten for xinmao = 17 Jan] Zhang Yang came from Yewang to pay court. He planned to escort the emperor back to Luoyang, but the other leaders would not agree, and he went back to Yewang.
If Liu Bei cannot match Lord Cao, even if you held all of Chu you would not be able to maintain your position; and if Liu Bei is indeed a match for Lord Cao, he will never agree to serve you."
so Cao Cao went with the major Xiahou Dun of Pei state and others to Yang province, where he made a levy of troops.He gathered about a thousand men, and brought them to camp in Henei [with Yuan Shao].
"In former times Emperor Xiaoxuan assembled Confucianists at the Stone Canal Pavilion, and Emperor Zhang gathered scholars in the White Tiger Hall. They made a comprehensive analysis to explain the meaning of the classics. These were great and excellent affairs, representing the true Way of action for both [the sage kings] Wen and Wu [of Zhou], and they should be followed.
On the day guisi [8 Aug] rewards were given for the selection of the emperor. Dou Wu was enfeoffed as Marquis of Wenxi and his son Dou Ji became Marquis of Weiyang. Dou Wu's nephews, Dou Shao and Dou Jing, were made marquises of Hu and of Xi District respectively.The Regular Attendant Cao Jie became Marquis of Chang'an District. Altogether eleven men received fiefs.
Guo Tu and Chunyu Qiong of Yingchuan argued, "The Han house has long been failing. Now you want to restore it, but that is surely too difficult.
If he had followed my advice we shouldprobably not have been taken."
The "five marquises" [Shan Chao, Xu Huang, Ju Yuan, Zuo Guan and Tang Heng] were particularly greedy and lawless, and the repercussions [of their abuse of power] were felt both at the capital and in the provinces.
Zheng Hun also sent officers and people who were generousand trustworthy to make proclamation in the hills and valleys.Those who had run away came back again,
Cao Cao led his troops west into the mountains against Poison's base camp.
When Liu Bei heard of this, he was worried and asked FaZheng,
In the spring, in the first month on the day dingyou [29 Feb], there was an amnesty for the empire.
Hou Lan will immediately have appreciated the significance of this, and he now has some cause for anxiety on his own behalf. In my humble opinion, he should no longer be permitted to remain in a close position to your majesty.
In the summer, in the first month the Wuhu barbarians of Hepu and Jiaozhi rebelled. They attracted support from the people of Jiuzhen and Rinan, and they attacked and destroyed commandery and county offices.
Besides, I used to serve General Liu and now I serve you.If I leave here one day and then later I curse you, would that beright?" Lü Bu, ashamed, gave up the idea.
Chen Fan, however, sent in another letter on his own account, "Now there are robbers and bandits outside, and these are a disease of the four limbs; disorder within the government, however, is a danger to the heart.
Chen Qiu replied, "Chen Fan and Dou Wu suffered wrong, and the dowager was incarcerated without good reason. This is a constant source of anguish to me, and a cause of resentment and anger throughout the empire.
In the fifth month on the day bingshen [16 Jun] Cao Cao wasenfeoffed as Duke of WEI, still continuing as Imperial Chancellorand Governor of Ji province.
Zong Zi the Administrator of Runan had made Fan Pang his Officer of Merit, and Cheng Jin the Administrator of Nanyang gave parallel appointment to Cen Zhi. Each gave full trust to his subordinate, approving their praise of good men and correction of the bad, and so they purified the government of those commanderies.
Before this, Liu Chong, King of Chen, was a brave man and expertwith a crossbow.
Shan Kuang, son of an elder brother of Shan Chao, became Administrator of Jiyin.He took advantage of his power to disolay his greed。
butif you take them while they are squabbling then the whole empirecan be settled.
Cao Cao met Liu Bei at Liang and went forward to Pengcheng.
In the autumn, in the ninth month, Cao Cao crossed the YellowRiver and attacked Yuan Tan.
In the summer, in the fourth month on the day jiazi [miswritten for jiawu, 20 May] the Honoured Lady Fu from Langye was made Empress. The Empress' father the Palace Attendant Fu Wan was appointed Bearer of the Mace.
Then they heard Cao Cao was coming back, and Liu Biao said to Liu Bei, "I did not accept your plan, and I let this great chance slip."
So he gives free rein to his private desires, he hastens to carry out his evil intentions. Ruler and ministers share the display of their vices, high and low act wrongfully, the government and people is neglected, and all is abandoned and in disarray.
Next day, he saw Sun Shao andappointed him Colonel Who Upholds Courage with command of allhis father's troops.
The Administrator of Shanyang, Zhai Chao, had appointed Zhang Jian of that commandery as Investigator of the Eastern Division.
The work has been done by Heaven; so how can you extend rewards on that account, and build up your own position by this means?
"Then came the trouble with Dong Zhuo, and I raised loyaltroops.
"Again, your majesty loves to go incognito to the homes of your close associates, and you honour the residences of eunuchs with private visits. Clients and retainers may be bargained for in the market-place, andauthority is peddled at the roadside; so oppression springs up everywhere and everything is open to influence.
The Yellow River and the Ji, moreover, are strategic points of the empire: though the countryside is now in ruins it is still easy to maintain yourself here. This is your 'land within the passes' and your 'Henei;' you must settle it first.
I shall tryto talk with him, and I may be able to win him over."
Cai Yong was afraid and obeyed the order. When he arrived he received provisional appointment as Libationer [in the offices of the Excellency of Works]. He was graded First Class, and in the space of three days he passed through three Terraces, and was then made a Palace Attendant.
Yuan Shao, with Yuan Tan and a few of their [289]senior staff, fled on horseback across the Yellow River with anescort of eight hundred cavalry.
The Heir Cao Pi executed Wei Feng, several thousand other men died because they were implicated, and Zhong Yao was dismissed.
and say to him, "Fu Nanrong, just make a bit of response to my brother, and a marquisate with ten thousand households is yours."
Wei Gu and the others were pleased, and though they pretended toserve Du Ji they paid no thought to him.
Tao Qian the Governor of Xu province was seriously ill. He said to his Attendant Officer Mi Zhu of Donghai, "No-one but Liu Bei can ever give peace to this province."
and since Shi Huang the Administrator of Cangwu had diedabout this time, he also sent Wu Ju to take his place.
Zhai Rong, however, took the grain for his own purposes. He raised a great Buddhist hall of worship, encouraged people to read the Buddhist sutras, and brought in those of nearby commanderies who loved the Buddha, more than five thousand households.
Another edict demanded that each province and commandery unit send a quota of timber and patterned stone to the capital.
Was it just the courage of these few worthy scholars? No. It was the inherited influence of Emperors Guangwu, Ming and Zhang that brought such sense of duty.
"If, on the other hand, you do not follow this plan of certainvictory,5 but prefer to trust the result to a single [273] battle, you may find that affairs go against you; and it will then be too late forregrets."
Li Gao was transferred to be Minister of Finance. Hiding himself in a grain and fodder storehouse, Su Buwei tunnelled under a wall to gain entry to [128] Li Gao's bedroom. There he killed Li Gao's concubine and also his small son.
Liu Bei was furious. He summoned Yang Huai and Gao Pei,commanders of Liu Zhang's army at Boshui, charged them with lackof courtesy, and cut off their heads.
The Consultant Pang Xi of Henan had always been a friend of Liu Yan, and he sent someone to collect Liu Yan's grandchildren and bring them into Shu.
But even if you put me to death, I could not do that."
but Zhao Yan issued orders to "Take only the ringleaders for punishment. Ask nothing of the others." Those caught by commandery and county admini strations were sent back, and all the rest gave themselves up.
It is only a short time since the last rebellion [of the Qiang], and this is something I am truly concerned about.That is why I venture to overstep my proper responsibilities and offer my humble services."
Now I am recruiting anarmy and building a state. I disregard old enmities and take onlythose who are capable and can be of service.
An edict was sent to Yuan Shao appointing him General of the Right.
Liu Biao was uncertain and could not make up his mind. He orderedHan Song to go to Xu city, saying to him, "We cannot tell how theempire will be settled, but Cao Cao holds the emperor in his capitalat Xu. Go and see what weaknesses he may have, then tell me."
Send a man to encourage Sun Quan to move against his rear, and promise to enfeoff him with all the territory south of the Yangzi. Then the siege of Fan will certainly be broken.
Zhang Huan declined, but asked instead for permission to transfer his official domicile to Hongnong.
When a man must establish a royal work, said Fei Shi, "he cannot use just one comrade.
In the space of a few years the number of people who cared for their children [and who would not have done so before] was numbered by the thousands.
If Cao Cao can become the leader of loyal men andset the empire to rights, there will be plenty of time for you to joinhim. If he plans oppression and disorder, he will destroy himselfvery quickly. How can he harm us?"
Liu Bei did not dare accept, saying, "Yuan Gonglu [Yuan Shu] is close by at Shouchun. Give the province to him. "
The people were separated into five divisions, each with one of their nobles as chiefs and a Han Chinese was appointed as Major to keep them under control,
This Xu Zijiang was Xu Shao, the nephew of Xu Xun. He was fond of grading people and had an appreciative eye for others' good qualities. He and his cousin Xu Jing had both gained high reputations. They were interested in people from the local communities, and every month they would prepare a new table of merits. As a result, in Runan, at the beginning of each month, all the people would gather to hear them publish their moral critiques.
The Administrator of Nanyang, Dongli Gun, and his Officer of Merit Ying Yu fought fiercely and managed to escape. Hou Yin sent horsemen after them, and arrows came from every direction. As Ying Yu protected Dongli Gun with his body, he was woundedseven times and died. Hou Yin's troopers captured Dongli Gun and brought him back.
The Minister of Justice Chen Qiu said, "The dowager was a woman of good family and abundant virtue. She was mother to all the empire. She should receive equal honours with the late emperor. There can be no doubt on the matter."
In the eleventh month the Excellency of Works Liu Chong left office.
If we keep quiet, on the other hand, then Sun Quan gets what he wants. That is not the best plan.
Zhao Yan said to them, "The enemy have a strong position and the floods are still rising. We do not have many men, while Cao Ren is quite cut off and cannot join forces with us. To attack now will only cause difficulty inside and out.
Yuan Benchu [Yuan Shao] is a descendant of great officials. He was born at the capital and has always lived there. Zhang Mengzhuo [Zhang Miao] is an old man from Dongping. All he knows is the proper way to sit in a hall of audience, glancing neither to the left nor to the right. Kong Gongxu [Kong Zhou] has Pure Conversation and impressive talk, so eloquent he can bring withered things to life just by breathing on them.
Now check the real situation. The troops he brought with him from central China were no more than a hundred and fifty or a hundred and sixty thousand, and they have been on hard active service for a long time. Then he got men from Liu Biao, seventy or eighty thousand at most, and their loyalty is still suspect.
The officers of Jing province all [208] offered congratulations,but Liu Biao replied, "Zhang Ji came because he was in want andwe, as host, lacked courtesy. A 'shepherd' of his people cannot wishto fight them. This shepherd deserves condolences, not congratula tions.
[In the second month] on the day guiyou [26 Mar] Dong Zhuo had the Prefect of the Gentlemen of the Palace Li Ru poison and kill Liu Bian the King of Hongnong.
"If we used the old punishments, sending adulterers to theSilkworm House [for castration] and cutting the feet off [460]robbers, then there would be neither immorality nor theft for a verylong time.
"I do not believe his people have heard anything from outside. They thought they would be relieved, but now they have come to this.
The Governor ofLiang province, Wei Duan, sent his Assistant Officer Yang Fu ofTianshui to Xu city. When he came back the leaders west of the passes asked, "Between Yuan and Cao, who will win and who willlose?" "Lord Yuan is lenient," replied Yang Fu, "but he is not decisive.He is fond of planning but cannot make up his mind. If he is notdecisive he will have no authority, and if he is slow to make up hismind he will not be able to keep pace with events. He is the strongernow, but he will never gain the empire.
Looking upon it now, it could make one laugh. Thinking more deeply, however, it is a warning for us all.
Dry bones from a tomb, why bother about them?
Guanghe 光和 2: 179 AD
"I," said Cao Cao, "would use the wise and strong men of theempire, and govern them loyally and honestly. That way, I couldmanage anything."
If your majesty's actions do not accord with the will of Heaven, you cannot count these omens as a cause for rejoicing."
Liu Biao was still angry. He took the men that had accom panied Han Song and examined them by torture until they died.Then he realised that Han Song had never intended treachery, so hedid not kill him but only put him in prison.
and other officials then sent in memorials to criticise them. Liu Mao did not venture to raise the subject again.
The elders sang his praises: of all the officials they had known or heard of, there had never been an Inspector like Liang Xi.
Ashamed that hisplan had failed, Guo Tu now spoke to Yuan Shao against Zhang He,saying, "Zhang He is pleased that our army has been defeated."
He raised Chen Gui's salary to Fully Two Thousand shi, andappointed Chen Deng Administrator of Guangling.
"Furthermore, Yuan Shao is a very ordinary leader: he cancollect men but he does not know how to use them.
"First of all, send a messenger to present captives to the court.If he cannot get through, then report that Cao Cao is blocking ouraccess to the emperor. Go forward to Liyang to camp, and graduallydevelop fortified positions south of the Yellow River.16 Build moreboats, put your weapons and equipment in repair, and send detach ments of good cavalry to raid the borders, so that the enemy has nopeace and our men can take their ease.
He would not accept the argument, and so Sun Ce broke off with him.
Du Shang calculated that if he treated his men leniently they would refuse battle, and if he tried to force them they would simply run away.
Zheng Li and others were now sent with a Staff of Authority, accompanied by imperial clerks and internuncios, to arrest Dou Wu and his supporters.
Yuan Shao crossed the Yellow River to follow them, but JuShou objected, saying, "When fighting a war, you must take care toconsider every possibility.
He used charmed water to treat illness, and he made those who were sick kneel down and confess their faults. Some got better, and so people worshipped and believed in him.
Leading out his army, he camped at the Pan River,sent a memorial to the court listing Yuan Shao's crimes and wrongdoings, and brought his men forward to attack him.
"Outwardly Yuan Shao acts generously, but privately he isjealous. He uses men but he is suspicious of them, and heappoints only the sons and kinfolk of his own or his wife'sfamilies. Outwardly you are easy and simple, but inside you areclever and shrewd. You use men and trust them. It is only theirability that matters and you pay no attention to relationship.This is the superiority of a liberal mind.
When Cao Cao spoke with him, he was very pleased and said, "You are my Zifang!
Cao Cao despatched some men on feint attacks, while otherswere sent secretly onto the Wei with boats to construct a pontoonbridge, and during the night he had a detachment set up a picket onthe south of the river.
Liu Biao set up schools to teach the classics, and he ordered the former Gentlemanof the Court Music Du Kui of Henan to compose ceremonial music.
He reinforced the walls ofthe cities and prepared great stocks of wood and stone, ready fordefence in war.
He fired a single shot, and hit square on the spike of thehalberd.
The General of the Household Xu Rong recommended Gongsun Du to Dong Zhuo. Gongsun Du was a man from Xu Rong's own commandery [Xuantu], and a former Inspector of Ji province. Dong Zhuo appointed him Administrator of Liaodong.
When Liu Yao fled to Yuzhang, Taishi Ci had hidden amongthe Wuhu hills and styled himself Administrator of Danyang.
Because military matters were still unsettled, Cao Caoaccepted the majority position and took no action.
Bao Xin and his colleagues agreed, and with the provincial officers Wan Qian and others they went to Dong commandery and asked Cao Cao to take over as Inspector of Yan province.
but Sun Ce said, "White Tiger andthose fellows are nothing but mobs of bandits. They have no greatideas and they can certainly be taken."
All his officers argued, "You should invite him to join you, so that together you may attack stronger enemies." Cao Cao laid his sword across his knee, coloured up, and refused to listen.
Li Ying has shown authority in You and Bing provinces, and benevolence in the Trans-Liao command.
The bandits may be expert with long lances, but I canarrange things so they will not be able to use them. Just watch!"
My position was extremely difficult, and I had tomake the journey, but it was certainly dangerous, and I almost fellinto the clutches of Zhou Yu."
Pang Tong said to him, "Jing province is in disorder andruins, the people and property are all exhausted. In the east there isSun the Chariots and Cavalry General and to the north there is CaoCao. You will find it difficult to obtain your ambitions here.
Before this, Zhang Hong had urged Sun Quan to set his centre ofgovernment at Moling, as it was a fine site [438] among rivers andhills.
According to the old system, if one of the Three Excellencies had command of troops, when they came to audience guards Rapid as Tigers were ordered to hold naked swords against his side.
The people are weary of disorder, and now that disorder has reached its limit, it will soon be settled. Let me be the first."
Sun Quan had sent messengers to Liu Bei saying, "Liu Zhang is not a fighting man, and he cannot hold his position for long. If Cao Cao takes SHU, then Jing province will be in danger.
In the spring, in the third month, Zhang Yan, leader of the BlackMountain bandits, joined Gongsun Xu and brought a hundredthousand soldiers by three routes to the relief [of Gongsun Zan inYi].
Gao Shun was a man of honour, with an air of authority andfew words.
Cao Cao heard about this and appointed Sima Yi to office, but Sima Yi sought to excuse himself by claiming he had rheumatism.
Huangfu Gui wrote back in his own defence: "In the autumn of the fourth year [of Yanxi: i.e. last year], the western tribes were actively disobedient, and the ancient capital [Chang'an] was in fear and trembling. The courtitself looked anxiously to the west.
One may observe above the will of Heaven, which sends down no calamities; and one can see below, in human affairs, that our actions are harmonious and successful.
Recognising how strongly he felt about it, Cao Cao did not press him.
As Sun Quanwas leading the army back to Wu he came to the camp by night andfeigned a surprise attack.
In the autumn, in the seventh month Zhang Meng the Administrator of Wuwei killed the Inspector of Yong province, Handan Shang. The provincial troops attacked and killed him.
The AttendantOfficer of Yang province, Jiang Ji of Chu state, spoke secretly to theInspector, pretending he had received a letter from Zhang Xi to saythat forty thousand horse and foot had already reached Xulü.
But now there are soldiers fighting everywhere, and this is more than I care to deal with."So the best policy is to leave weapons aside, put work into ploughing, and tide things over through these difficult years.
and if I can stay in the commandery for just onemonth it will give me time to arrange a plan to keep them quiet."
He Jin would not listen.When the Colonel Who Arranges the Army Cao Cao heard of this debate, he laughed and said, "There has always been a need for eunuchs, but the rulers of our time should never have granted them such authority and favour as to cause this trouble.
"Excellent!" said Cao Cao, and he promised peace to Yuan Tan.
They went back to drink and feast, and he showedJiang Gan his attendants, and his objects of ornament and pleasure. Then said Zhou Yu, "In all the world, I have found the onemaster who understands me. Outwardly, we behave with the formal ities of ruler and subject, but inside we are joined as blood-brothers.He approves anything I suggest and he always agrees to my plans.In fortune or misfortune, we share it. If Su Qin or Zhang Yi wereborn again, could they change my feelings?" Jiang Gan simply laughed, and did not raise the subject again.
Gongsun Zan's forces were more restricted everyday.
In the spring, in the first month on the day guiyou [23 Feb] there was a great amnesty and the reign-title was changed [to Jian'an].
Sun Ce brought heavy reinforcements to attack Yuzhang, settingcamp at Jiaoqiu.45 He said to his Officer of Merit Yu Fan, "Hua Ziyu [Hua Xin] 46 has a fine reputation, but he is no match for me.
"Now Cao Jie and his fellows are quite unrestrained in the harm they do, and they have long held position as attendants at court. Your own brother the Palace Attendant suffered at their hands."What you should do now is recommend that the Minister of the Guards Yang Qiu be transferred to become Director of Retainers, so that he may arrest Cao Jie and his fellows and punish them. Then the government will produce sage leader-ship and the empire will benefit from great peace. People stand tiptoe in hope and expectation that this will come to pass."
Cao Cao sent the Imperial Clerk Preparer of Documents Wei Ji ofHedong to keep the lands within the passes quiet.26 At this timerefugees everywhere were seeking to return to their former homes,but the leaders within the passes were forcing [those who came backinto their territories] to enter their service.
If you disregard the plans of security and safety, andraise an army without good cause, then I am anxious for you." [253]
Zhou Yu went to Jing city to see Sun Quan, and said to him, "CaoCao has just been defeated, and will be worried about the loyalty ofeven his closest companions. He can do nothing against you forsome time to come.
The Counsellor Remonstrant Liu Tao sent in a memorial to say, "A short time ago the empire suffered the disorders of Zhang Jue, and since then we have the rebellion of Bian Zhang on our hands. Now the rebel Qiang from the west have already attacked Hedong, and I am afraid they may grow strong enough to attack the capital itself.
Admiring his loyalty and courage, the tribesmen did him no harm, but sent him back to Hanyang.
And now, when you are constantly concerned that he may kill you, how can you talk of father and son?
Cao Cao's men had bound Shen Pei, and as they broughthim to headquarters they met Xin Pi. He slashed Shen Pei across theface with a whip, and cursed him, "Now, slave, you will die!"
Cao Cao couldcampaign in any direction and have no trouble with his supplies,and so he was able to conquer all his rivals.
The Banshun barbarians raided and plundered Ba commandery. Campaigns had been sent against them year after year, but they had not been subdued.
For several years Liu Fu acted with grace and honesty, and thewandering people that turned to him were numbered by the tens ofthousands.
In the spring, in the first month Cao Cao crossed the Yellow River.He dammed the Qi River into the Bo Canal to make a route for hissupplies.
and now that she held the regency she consulted him on every question of government, large or small.
Now Liu Biao has just died, his two sons are in disagreement, and the leaders of their army have divided loyalties.
In carrying out a great affair, replied Liu Bei, "the people arethe essential thing. Now that the people have turned to me, how can I desert them?"
If you can deal with him, then everything will have been decided in our favour. If things turn out badly, come back to me here, and I shall myself fight the deciding battle against Mengde [Cao Cao].
When he was young, Cao Zhang was extremely good at archery and at driving a chariot, and he was stronger than most.
The Xiongnu and the Wuhuan burnt the gates [of the fortress] of the General on the Liao [at Manbo city in Wuyuan commandery], and the camp was withdrawn to Chikeng.There was smoke and flame in every direction.
Cao Cao sent the Consultant Wang Pu with an imperial message toappoint Sun Ce as a Commandant of Cavalry, granting him thesuccession to the marquisate of Wucheng, and authority asAdministrator of Kuaiji. He was ordered to join Lü Bu and Chen Yuthe Administrator of Wu commandery in operations against Yuan Shu.
Before this, when Dong Zhuo entered the passes to Chang'an he left Zhu Jun to guard Luoyang. Zhu Jun, however, was in secret contactwith the east of the mountains. Afraid that Dong Zhuo would attack him, he fled to Jing province.
Zhu Jun was made General of Chariots and Cavalry on the Right.
"Unless you deal with Lü Bu first," advised Xun Yu, "it will notbe easy to make plans for the north of the River."
The emperor sent a messenger to say to Guo Si, "It is merely that Hongnong is close to the sacrificial and ancestral temples. There is no cause for suspicion."
Then Liu Bei killed Che Zhou the Inspector of Xu province.Leaving Guan Yu to hold Xiapi and attend to the responsibilities ofthe Administrator, he went himself back to Xiaopei.
"In ancient times Zhao Yang raised the armed men of Jinyang to drive wicked men from the side of his lord.As I now sound the bells and drums of punishment and march to Luoyang, I ask permission to arrest Zhang Rang and his fellows and to clear out the evil and wrong."The Dowager still refused her approval.
The Xianbi raided Jiuquan. The numbers of their people increased day by day, and there was no region of the border country which did not suffer from them.
Paying no attention, Dian Wei said to his men, "When the enemy are ten paces away, report it."
These days, honour goes to the strong. What makes CaoCao so special?" Qian Zhao shouted at Han Zhong, "Lord Cao is sincere andrespectful, wise and understanding. He supports the Son of Heaven,[335] he attacks rebels but is kind to those who submit. He givespeace to the four seas.
Drawing his sword, he chopped the desk in front of him, saying, "Any officer who still dares argue for surrender will suffer like this."
Next morning, when Guo Tai got up, he went to the foot of Qiu Xiang's bed and bowed to him, saying, "Rather than my colleague, you are my teacher."
[You]beiping commandery used to be administered from Pinggang, and there was a road from Lulong through to Liucheng.
Cai Mao, younger brother of Liu Biao's wife, and his sister's son Zhang Yun were both in Liu Biao's favour, and every day they slandered Qi and praised Zong.
Because the emperor at that time was a wanderer and had no security, however, Tian Chou felt this was no time for a subject to receive favours and rewards, and that he could not accept the honour. He refused it firmly,
"Yang Feng, however, isnearby at Liang, and I have heard that he has good soldiers. Don'tyou think he may cause me trouble?" [197]
There is a tradition which tells us, 'When the fruit is too plentiful, it damages the branches and may harm the heart of the tree.'
Li Dian, formerly an enemy of Zhang Liao, now supported him with enthusiasm, "This is a great affair of state. When I see you planning like this, how can I keep my personal grudge and neglect the public good?
Someone suggested to the government, "The people are in distress and difficulty because the currency is considered to be of poor value and the coinage is short weight. The mint should issue larger coins."
[The site of the capital of] Lingling lay on low and swampy ground, and the city wall was constructed only of logs. People in the commandery were frightened and confused.
The emperor took his advice. Cao Qian was appointed Administrator and an edict was proclaimed to grant an amnesty. All the people came at once to submit.
His mother replied to him from afar, "Weihao, each person has their own fate. How can we be concerned for one another if we harm loyalty and honour to do so? You must carry out your duty!"
Whenever Guan Ning saw Gongsun Du, he would speak only of the classics and histories, and would make no mention of currentaffairs. When he went back into the hills he talked only about the Odes and the History, and he carried out and practiced worship with the sacrificial utensils. He refused to see any person who was not a scholar.
Gongsun Zan built a small fort in the southeast of Ji city and went to live there.
"Now Yuan Shao has over ten thousand carts of supplies atGushi and Wuchao, and the escort which accompanies them [287]is quite unprepared. If you move with light-armed troops and takethem by surprise you can destroy their stores. No more than threedays after that, Yuan will be defeated of himself."
When Wang Rui heard that soldiers had come, he climbed a tower and looked out, then sent to ask, "What do you want?"
He Jin learnt privately of the plot, and he sent in a memorial that Yuan Shao should be sent to collect the soldiers of the two provinces of Xu and Yan. This was a means to delay, because Yuan Shao had to return before he himself went to the west.
The emperor brought [his natural mother] the Honoured Lady Dong from Hejian.
Cao Cao once remarked, "When Xun Wenruo [Xun Yu] recom mended a worthy project, he would follow up until it had been adopted and carried through. When Xun Gongda [Xun You] disap proved of a bad policy, he would not stop until it was abandoned."
On one occasion, when Du Mi was Chancellor of Beihai, he was making his spring tour of inspection and came to Gaomi. He saw Zheng Xuan, who at that time was the Bailiff of a district, and recognised his exceptional quality. He appointed Zheng Xuan to a position in his office, then sent him on to the University; Zheng Xuan eventually became a great scholar.
You sayyou have too many other things to do, but you cannot be as busy as Iam. I am always reading books, and I believe they have a great dealto do with my success."
If we advance deep into their territory, Liu Bei will surely persuade Liu Biao to raid Xu city. If they cause trouble from that direction, you will have no chance for second thoughts."
Dong Zhuo said, "The land within the passes is rich and abundant, and that is why Qin was able to conquer its rival states.
When Guan Yu hears Sun Quan is coming, he will go back to defend himself.So the siege will be broken quickly, and we shall have the advantage:
When the army reached Ji, the Wuhuan found that no supplies hadbeen issued, and many of them deserted and went back home.
All those passing by on the road heard this, and everyone wept at the scene.
The Chancellor of Xiapi, Cao Bao, had been an officer under Tao Qian. He fell out with Zhang Fei and Zhang Fei killed him. There were riots in the city.
and the Minister Coachman Zhao Qi persuaded Liu Biao to send men to help with the construction work. The convoys of supplies arrived in a steady stream.
Cao Cao heard of this, and he sighed with admiration, saying, "If the men in office are like this, then the people of the empire can govern themselves. What more need I do?"
At this time there was always a queue of hundreds and thousands of carriages outside Zhang Rang's gate, bringing clients who sought to call upon him. Meng Tuo went to visit Zhang Rang, but he arrived late and could not get through. Then, however, the senior slave came with a number of the others.They bowed to him in welcome on the road, then led his carriage forward into the gate.All the clients were amazed, and remarked how excellent must be Meng Tuo's relations with Zhang Rang. They competed in offering valuable presents to gain his favour.
Ma Chao now set his camp south of the Wei and sentmessengers offering to cede the area west of the Yellow River inexchange for peace.
Once again, Li Fu led his three horsemen. Dressed like the peoplesurrendering, they went with them and disappeared into the dark. Sothey broke through the siege-lines and made their escape.
The Three Excellencies deal with matters outside, the imperial clerks investigate matters within.
So Yuan Tan brought his forces to attack Yuan Shang,and they fought outside the gates [of the city of Ye].
Yuan Shao replied that his son was sick, so he would not go.
Before his rebellion getsunder way, and before his army is fully organised, this is the time toattack him. If you go at once you can defeat him."
Zhang Ju was proclaimed emperor, while Zhang Chun took the titles of General Who Governs the Universe and King of Peace and Settlement.11 They sent a letter to the provinces and commanderies to say that Zhang Ju was destined to succeed the Han, and that the Son of Heaven should leave his place and send his excellencies and ministers to welcome the new ruler.
Close companions receive fief cities without good cause, attendants are handed rewards without good work, and within a single family there may be several men with marquisates.In this way the patterns of nature lose their true measure, and the Yin and the Yang fall into disarray.
"Again, the correct form of conduct for the emperor himself requires that he have no private property, but should concern himself with the great business of government. He should ignore all petty matters."
Zhang Pan said, "I held position as chief of a province, but I was wronged by Du Shang, and so I am punished with imprisonment.
Your servant Sima Guang remarks:Teaching is of utmost importance to the state, but officials of the common sort treat it with contempt. Custom is the greatest matter for the empire, yet there are stupid rulers who neglect it.
The Grand Commandant Liu Kuan left office. The Minister of theGuards Xu Yu became Grand Commandant.
For a short time he could get people to follow him,but they never stayed for long.
The emperor asked, "What do they want to do that is outside the law?"
The city surrendered and Cao Cao led hisarmy back to the Ao Granary.
When the General of the Van Feng Gun made his southern campaign into Wuling (in 162), it was once again the Banshun people that helped him to success.
When he had finished Sun Quan had him get dressed again, then took him by the arm and wept, saying, "Youping,you are my brother. In time of war, with no thought for your own safety, you fight like a bear or a tiger. You have been wounded scores of times and your skin is like an engraving. It is only natural that I hold you in my heart with the affection of a close kinsman, and you surely deserve your high command."
Soon afterwards, however, Han Fu's officer Qu Yi rebelled. Han Fu fought him and was defeated, and Yuan Shao made an alliance with Qu Yi.
Yuan Shu sent a letter to summon Chen Gui, took his sonas hostage, and was confident of his support.
"Whenever I receive an edict at the Gate of Abundant Reform, I examine the quality [of the candidates for office], but I note that even those who fail to reach the proper standard receive appointment nonetheless.
Taishi Ci went forward nonetheless, and he came face to face with Sun Ce.Sun Ce wounded Taishi Ci's horse, and grasped the dagger above Taishi Ci's neck. Taishi Ci got Sun Ce's helmet.
That family has been spreading favour for four generations, so they have clients and officials who have served under them throughout the empire. If Yuan Shao calls up fighting men and raises an army, then bold warriors will join him in rebellion and you will hold nothing east of the mountains.
From Zilu, Ran Qiu and Gongxi Chi, the highest of hisfollowers, to the high minister Ziwen, Chen Wenzi and the worthygrandees of the feudal lords, none qualified for that description. Itwas only Guan Zhong whom he praised for his humanity, and surelythis was because Guan Zhong, as assistant to Duke Huan of Qi,gave great relief to living people.The conduct of Duke Huan of Qi was like that of a dog or a pig,yet Guan Zhong was not ashamed to act as his chancellor. It is clearthat he saw Duke Huan as the only way the people could be saved.
"Why do you say that?"asked the emperor.
Cui Qi said to him, "In former times, when Guan Zhong was Chancellor of Qi, he was pleased to hear words of criticism, and when Xiao He assisted [Emperor Gao, founder of] Han, he actually appointed officials with responsibility to recordthings which were wrong.
Lü Bu made decisions hastily, and his actions were seldomconsistent. Gao Shun would often remonstrate with him, "When youstart something, you never think of details. Given a choice betweenthe route to success or the possibility of failure, you always makethe wrong decision!" Lü Bu appreciated his loyalty, but he could notfollow his advice.
"Ziyuan [Zang Hong] is one of the most loyal men of the empire" replied Zhang Chao." He will never turn his back upon me. My only concern is that he may be forcibly prevented from coming to join us."
Speaking at the wrong time brings misfortune."
When that happens, send your best men to occupy the strategic places and attack them. This way you will win."
In my view, however, wolves are wild by nature, and it is difficult to treat them gently. When their strength is exhausted they will submit, but once our troops leave they will stir again. The only way to handle them is with a long spear in the side and a sharp sword at the neck.
"The other eleven provinces are also affected by the prohibitions, but the problem in these two is extremely serious.
The emperor is young and weak, and I am the only person he can depend upon. Even when danger comes, I cannot run away.
Cao Cao sent the Director of Retainers Zhong Yao to besiege theSouthern Shanyu at Pingyang, but the relief [Guo Yuan] arrivedbefore they could capture the place.
When Sun Ce had captured Huan city he looked after YuanShu's family, and when he entered Yuzhang he collected Liu Yao'scoffin and treated his family well. Gentlemen and scholars praisedhim for it.
Many of his advisers said, "The soldiers westof the passes are skilled in the long lance. Unless we train ouradvance guard and choose them carefully we shall not be able tocope with them."
As Ju Shou was about to leave, he called his clansmen together,divided his possessions among them and said, "If we survive, myauthority will certainly be recognised everywhere. If we lose, I shallnot escape with my life. The pity of it."
The Excellency of Works Yuan Feng left office. The Minister of Ceremonies Zhang Ji became Excellency of Works.
Then, when theaffair was ended and achievement complete, he sought to take thecredit for the Han dynasty. This is like telling a thief to bore througha wall and empty another man's cupboards, but then not helping himto carry away the spoil. Can such a person claim that he too is not arobber?" I, your servant Sima Guang, recall Confucius' saying: "Litera ture over reality, that is a scribe." Whenever a historian records aman's words, he always adds a literary [442] touch.
Now I am already sixty years old. Life and death are a matter of fate, and how can I escape?"
In the eleventh month Huangfu Gui attacked the Qiang and defeated them, taking eight hundred heads
The Dowager trusted them and issued a number of edicts of enfeoffment or appointment [at their behest].
Thehigh officials impeached him, for "Standing aloof against the right Way of action, and wilfully using this opportunity to establish a petty name for virtue. He should be dismissed and punished."
As Cao Cao was engaged in the north Liu Bei had advised Liu Biao to attack Xu city, but Liu Biao did not agree.
That old brigand, observed Sun Quan, "has long wanted to end the Han and take the empire for himself. He had the two Yuan, Lü Bu, Liu Biao and me to worry about. Now the others are dead, and I am the only one who remains.
At this time, just after the emperor's death and when the succession to the throne had not yet been decided, the Masters of Writing were frightened and anxious, and many of them made excuses of illness and failed to attend court.
I was thinking, answered Jia Xu, "of Yuan Benchu and Liu Jingsheng, fathers and sons."
Jia Long, an Assistant Officer of the province, led officers and people to attack Ma Xiang and the others. After several days the rebels were defeated and fled, the territory of the province was at peace,
If Your Excellency uses virtue to support the imperial court, replied Huangfu Song, "it will be a time of great blessing, and why should I be afraid?
Wang Fu's adopted son Wang Ji was Chancellor of Pei, and was particularly oppressive and tyrannical. Whenever he had a man killed, he would place the corpse on a cart, accompanied by a placard listing the person's crimes, and have it taken to each of the counties under his jurisdiction. In summer months the flesh would rot away, but he still tied the bones together and sent them around till they had travelled through the whole commandery. Everyone who saw them was terrified.
Fa Zheng sent a written message to Liu Zhang. He set out the situation, then went on to say, "Since the General of the Left [Liu Bei] raised troops he has always thought well of you. He is truly not a man of mean nature.
but Zhao Yun argued, "Because the Xiongnu had not been completely destroyed, Huo Qubing had no use for a house.
In the spring, in the third month Cao Cao brought his army to Qiao.
but Tian Feng pressed his argu ment. Believing he would upset the morale of the army, Yuan Shaohad him chained up.
Du Shang went from man to man to comfort and commiserate, showing the deepest regret for their losses. Then he said, however, "Bu Yang and his fellows have enough treasure with them to make any family rich for generations to come.
The eunuch attendants intensely disliked these proposals. Xie Bi was sent away to be Assistant in Guangling commandery, but left that post and returned home.
He has spoken to an envoy from Sun Quan and he has slandered the imperial court.
Truly, if youtake this occasion to support the emperor and follow the expect ations of the people, it will match the will of Heaven. "To follow the cause of justice and so make the empire submit,that is a great plan, and to support the loyal cause and so attracttalented men, that is great virtue.
Once the court has extended its grace to them, it is difficult to withdraw or change the situation. If they merely receive an official emolument, this is already far more than they deserve; it is quite wrong that they should be given responsibility for governing the people or hold positions in the provinces and commanderies.
Zhang Rang made false accusation against him, saying that he was a supporter of Zhang Jue and planned to act as traitor within the gates. He was arrested and sent to the Northern Prison of the Yellow Gates, and was killed there.
Cao Cao appointed the Gentleman of the Masters of Writing Gao Rou to be Senior Clerk in the Department of Justice.
If you are all so hesitant, I shall settle it alone."
I ask permission to take a message of condolence to Liu Biao's sons. While I am there I can show our sympathies and make friends with the men who hold authority in their army, and I shall urge Liu Bei to collect Liu Biao's forces and join us against Cao Cao. Liu Bei will certainly be pleased and will accept the invitation.
Shi Xie recommended his younger brothers for office, so Shi Yitook over as Administrator of Hepu, Shi Hui became Administratorof Jiuzhen, and Shi Wu was Administrator of Nanhai.
Sun Ce found out, and hesent his officers Lü Fan and Xu Yi to attack Chen Yu at Haixi.29Chen Yu was defeated, and fled alone on horseback to Yuan Shao.
Some people criticised Guo Tai for not keeping himself aloof from an evil-doer, but Guo Tai remarked, "If a man is not virtuous, and you show too much dislike for him, he will behave all the worse."
Moreover, the former Grand Tutor Chen Fan gave all his strength for your imperial house, but then he was suddenly attacked by a hordeof evil men and was cruelly and unlawfully destroyed. This was such a shock as to affect all the empire. And now his students and former subordinates are also suffering proscription.
Zhao Zhong, Xia Yun and others made false accusatios against Lu Qiang, saying that he had discussed affairs of state with the men of Faction, that he had read and re-read the biography of Huo Guang,
An edict ordered that Cao Cao should have the privilege ofperforming obeisance without announcing his name, entering courtwithout hastening step, and appearing in the hall of audience withsword and shoes. This followed the precedent of Xiao He.
but the Palace Attendant Dong Fu of Guanghan spoke to him privately and said, "The capital district will fall into disorder, and the region of Yi province has omens of the Son of Heaven."
and recommended Sun Ce as Colonel Who Breaks the Enemy Line.Sun Ce had little more than a thousand soldiers and a few dozen horsemen, nd.
Sun Ce sent men to behead him there, then went to Yuan Shu to apologise.
In the second month, on the day yihai [28 Mar] Dong Zhuo memorialised that because of disasters and strange happen- ings, Huang Wan, Yang Biao and others should be dismissed. The Minister of the Household Zhao Qian became Grand Commandant and the Minister Coachman Wang Yun was made Excellency over the Masses.The Colonel of the City Gates Wu Qiong and the Colonel Who Controls the Army Zhou Bi strongly criticised the proposal to shift the capital. Dong Zhuo was very angry and said, "When I first came to court you two urged me to employ fine scholars. I accepted your advice and these men came to office,
The Grand Commandant Liu Ju left office.The Minister of Ceremonies Yang Bing became Grand Commandant.
"You just don’t understand things," answered Sun Jian.
If you accept what I say, Ishall not die in vain." He died at Baqiu.
The Qiang tried to cut our lines of communication, but I opened them with a small attack, and the reason [I could do this so easily] was that the enemy were afraid of the soldiers in Anding.
Zhongchang Tong said to him, "You seek to act as a hero, but you lack the ability. You show respect for scholars and gentlemen, but you choose the wrong men. I give you strong warning."
As Zhao Zhong considered Chen Qiu's argument, he responded from time to time by nodding his head. Then he laughed at Chen Qiu and said, "Minister Chen presents his argument very forcefully!"
How could I have known that your wrath would be more than a season's duration, and that your anger would fail to ease within the year? But it now turns out that messengers have been sent post-haste to proclaim accusations everywhere, and the cruel words of indictment are more bitter than frost or snow. Those who had me cast out still follow in my track, those who pursue me in their chariots never cease.
As Wang Hong came to his fate he cursed and said, "Song Yi was a useless bookworm, not fit to discuss great plans."
The Dowager He heard this and told He Jin.
In, and in the summer, in the fourth month they went on to attack [the capital of] Jiuzhen commandery.The Administrator Ni Shi died in battle.
and for Xu Xuan's outrageous conduct, death itself is perhaps insufficient.
When he went on a tour of inspection, however, he found all the administration in disorder, while Jiang Wan himself was dead drunk.
In the summer, in the fourth month Cao Cao drew up his troopsalong the Yellow River. He attacked Yuan Shao's men at Cangtingand defeated them.
Zhang Song told Fa Zheng that he should advise Liu Bei to takeLiu Zhang by surprise and seize him when they met.
Guo Si was killed by his ownfollower Wu Xi.
On the day dingyou [21 Mar] Cao Cao suggested to the throne that some twenty ministers of excellent conduct should be granted enfeoffment; they all became full marquises.
When his mother came to visit him he would go to the window to see her, but when she had left he closed it again. No other members of his family, not even his wife and children, were allowed to see him.
"The art of good government lies in first doing away with thefour harmful things, then promoting the five good points.
Xiahou Yuan, however, said, "We have marched and counter-marched a thousand li. If we now start building and digging, our soldiers will be exhausted and useless.
About this time Cao Cao sent a messenger to the province tohear court cases. Liu Ye invited him to his house,
In the spring, in the first month on the day guiyou [7],1 there was an amnesty for the empire.
Zhang Song the Attendant Officer of Yi province was a closefriend of Fa Zheng. He was confident of his own abilities, and he too felt that Liu Zhang did not appreciate him, so he was privatelydiscontented.
In earlier times, Emperor Gao tolerated the criticisms of Zhou Chang, even when they were sacrilegious,and Emperor Cheng pardoned Zhu Yun, though he was worthy of the neck and waist execution.If you kill Li Yun now, I fear the peopleof the empire may compare you to [Zhou Xin] who cut out the heart [of his minister Bi Gan]."
Zhu Jun has already gained considerable success in Yingchuan, and now he is leading his army against the south and his plans are settled. All military writers caution against changing generals in the middle of a campaign. We may wait for days or even months, but he will eventually produce results."
They stayed seven days, and the men from SHU that came to surrender reported that, "There are scores of alarms every day, and though the officers on guard behead the [493] troublemakers they cannot set the people at peace."
Wang Yi the Administrator of Hedong was recalled, but WeiGu, a Senior Clerk in the commandery, with the General of theHousehold Fan Xian and others, went to the Director of RetainersZhong Yao to ask that he remain.
Yang Biao realised that the house of Han was weak and indecline, and government was now in Cao Cao's hands. He pretendedto be suffering from cramps, and for more than ten years he did notwalk. So he avoided further trouble.
Cao Cao changed his mind and sent men after him,but they were not able to catch him.
"If Ziyi [Taishi Ci]32 deserts me," replied SunCe, "whom can he turn to?"
Shen Pei looked at him and said: "Dog, it is only because ofpeople like you that my Ji province has been destroyed. I regret thatI could not kill you,
he attacked Yuan Shang in Zhongshan.Yuan Shang was defeated and fled to Gu'an to join Yuan Xi.
He divided Liaodong to form Liaoxi and Zhongliao commanderies and appointed an Administrator to each of them,54 [59] while across the sea he collected all the counties of Donglai and set up an Inspector of Ying province.
About this time news came that Duke Cao of WEI was moving against Hanzhong. Liu Bei was afraid he might lose Yi province, so he sent messengers to Sun Quan asking for peace.
Zhao Yun arrived soon afterwards, bringing Liu Bei's son Shan with him.They met the fleet commanded by Guan Yu, and so crossed the Mian. Liu Bei was joined by Liu Qi and over ten thousand men of his army, and he brought them all to Xiakou.
so he left Zhuge Liang and Guan Yuand others to hold Jing province, with Zhao Yun as Major at theBase Camp, while he himself led several ten thousand foot-soldiersinto Yi province.
Lü Bu was very pleased, and he brought his army east down the [Si] River by water and land.
If you then send light troops to Boma and surprise the enemythere, Yan Liang can be taken."
Wei Gu agreed, but he did not get many men.
For reply, Lü Bu stabbed Dong Zhuo with his spear and ordered the soldiers to cut off his head.
In the winter, in the tenth month on the day gengyin [4 Nov?], Yang Ci died. He had been marquis of Linjin, and his posthumous title was Brilliant Cultivation.
For two thousand li, from Yunzhong and Wuyuan west as far as Hanyang, the Xiongnu and various Qiang have taken over territory. This is a hidden sore in our side which is festering and waiting to burst; if it is not cut away it will grow much worse.
Withsoldiers holding them down, however, those who wish to stay loyalhave no leader. It is only natural that they are frightened, so theylisten to Wei Gu. Wei Gu and his men have seized power,
Wei Gu and his associates sent several thousand soldiers toblock the Shan Crossing, and when Du Ji came up he was held therefor several months.
Yuan Shao argued further that the eunuchs were close to the emperor, sending out and taking in orders. Unless the system was halted completely and immedi- ately, it would certainly cause trouble later.
And yet, with the clear example so close at hand, and the warning of the overturned carriage as recent as if it were only yesterday, the new pattern of government is very much like the earlier one.
The Shanyu was now respectful and obedient, tribal chieftains bowed to the ground, and all submitted and served the empire as if they were registered Chinese citizens.
who immediately led soldiers into the headquarters to attack He Meng. He Meng was defeated and fled, and when daylight came his subordinate Cao Xing cut off his head.
So he appointed Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu as Controllers of the Left and of the Right in command of the troops to join Liu Bei against Cao Cao.Lu Su was named Colonel Who Assists the Army, to take part in planning.
In the winter, Sun Jian and his officers were holding a drinking party east of Luyang city when twenty or thirty thousand of Dong Zhuo's horsemen and foot-soldiers appeared without warning. Sun Jian, however, continued to pass the wine around and talked and laughed. He gave orders for his men to form up in their divisions, but that they should make no hasty move.
Xun Shuang was first appointed Chancellor of Pingyuan, but while he was still on his way there he was transferred to Wanling.He then became Minister of the Household, but after attending to the duties of that position for three days he was made Excellency of Works.
In the twelfth month the Minister of the Guards Zhou Jing became Excellency of Works.
Gan Ning wanted to leave, but was afraid he would not be able to make his escape.Then Su Fei spoke to Huang Zu,
When Dong Zhuo's soldiers observed such discipline, they turned back without venturing an attack.
All Cui Yan meant to say was that those who criticised [Yang Xun] were carping and unreasonable. But there were men who had [503] been on bad terms with him in the past, and someone reported that "Cui Yan is arrogant and speaks treason. He does not intend to stay loyal."Cao Cao was angry. He arrested Cui Yan and put him in prison, his head was shaven and he was sentenced to forced labour.
An edict appointed Huangfu Gui as General of the Household bearing the Staff of Authority, to supervise all military operations west of the passes for the suppression of the Lianyu and the other tribes.
If you leave them and go out, however, there willbe no strong guard and the fortress at Yi will fall immediately."
Gongsun Du died in this same year. He was succeeded by hisson Gongsun Kang, who enfeoffed his younger brother Gong asMarquis of Yongning.
"Besides this, east of the mountains there has long been peace and the people have no experience of war. West of the passes they have lately suffered the ravages of the Qiang barbarians, and even women and girls can carry a bow and fight. The men of Bing and Liang, and the non-Chinese auxiliaries, are feared throughout the empire, and they are your teeth and claws. It will be like sending tigers and rhinoceros against dogs and sheep, or calling up a violent wind to sweep away dead leaves. Who will dare oppose them?
He Xun said, "In ancient times, Wuding was a brilliant ruler, but he still sought wise rebuke.16 This is yet more true for someone like you, but you want to force men into silence."
The emperor ordered the Imperial Clerk Hou Wen to give out grain and beans from the main granary so that people could make gruel,
Cao Cao showed Sun Quan's letter around, remarking, "This boy would put me on top of the fire!"
Duan Wei, however, was on bad terms with Yang Ding, and Yang Ding's followers Chong Ji and Zuo Ling claimed that Duan Wei planned to rebel.
Now I am old, andyou want me to say something disloyal?"
The Minister of Ceremonies Zhang Hao of Changshan became Grand Commandant.
"On the other hand, calligraphy and painting, essays and rhapsodies, these are the skills of petty fellows, men who lack the ability to carry on great affairs of state.
Had the commanders used our suggestions, Liang province would have been settled.
When Wu Shu arrived in his territory, he executed a score or more of Liang Ji's clients for the harm they had done to other people.
"Liu Zhang, however, was dull and weak, and since the time of Liu Yan one generation after another has shown generosity. Seeking to curry favour with their subjects, they limited the effect of the law. As a result, the virtue of government has not been displayed, and the majestic punishments fail to command respect.
As Huangfu Li was leaving, he went to the gate of the palace and said to the emperor, "Li Jue refuses the imperial orders, and his speech is insubordinate."
Ju Yuan went to the prison to make apologies on his brother's behalf, and he returned his own seal and ribbon as Marquis of Dongwu[yang].
Let me have my face branded and my feet cut off, anything but interrupt my work on the history of Han."
and they sang one another's praises with Li Ying, Chen Fan and Wang Chang.
containing Part 4 of the reign of Emperor Xian Jian'an 1: 196 AD
Once before, when Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu were controllers of divisions on the left and right, they led soldiers to attack Jiangling. Zhou Yu had the deciding voice, but Cheng Pu shared command because of his seniority. They frequently disagreed, and they almost ruined the affairs of our state. Let this be a warning to us.
"I long to return within the gates of the nation to sit on the red jasper stone of humble witness, for the three counsellors, with the lords and ministers, to judge my cause. But the gates to Heaven are ninefold deep, and there are pitfalls at every turn. Any step may bring me into a trap; any movement may cause a net to cast upon me. I have no way to come before you, and no expectation that I shall be believed.
When he was young, he served Ma Rong, a great scholar of extravagant tastes, who had a constant supply of girls to sing and dance for him. Lu Zhi attended Ma Rong for many years, but never turned his eyes in their direction. Ma Rong admired him for this.
When he threw the axe at you, where was the feeling of father and son?"
So Liu Bei appointed Huang Quan as Protector of the Army, to take command of all the forces there and receive Zhang Lu.Zhang Lu had already surrendered, but Huang Quan attacked Fuhu, Duhu and Ren Yue and destroyed them.
The magistrate of Kaocheng, Wang Huan of Henei, appointed Qiu Xiang as his Registrar, and said to him, "I have heard that when you were at Pu village, you, did not punish Chen Yuan but reformed. You seem to have been reluctant to act as an eagle or a hawk."
Even before he had finished speaking, Fu Xie sighed miserably and said, "You know that I must die. A sage is equal to any position, and even a lesser man should not fail his responsibilities.
Zuo Yuan of Chenliu was a student in the commandery school, but he violated the law and was expelled.
His tears flowed down as he spoke.
Cheng Huang then issued an anonymous circular saying that, "Cai Yong and Cai Zhi have on several occasions sought favour for their private interests from Liu He, but Liu He refused their importunities.
Zhang Liao called for volunteers and obtained eight hundred soldiers. He killed oxen and held a feast at night.
"My offences have been unpardonable," replied Taishi Ci, "andyou measure with [the great dukes] Huan [of Qi] and Wen [of Jin]. Iwould give my life to repay your kindness.
He appointed Xu Xi and Mao Hui as commanderyadministrators.
Cao Cao returned to Suanzao. The allied armies, hundreds of thousands of men, laid out wine every day and held feasts, but they had no plans for attack. Cao Cao reproached them. Then he prepared a strategy and said, "Here is what I propose. Let the Administrator of Bohai [Yuan Shao] take the Henei army forward to the Meng Crossing, while the commanders at Suanzao blockade Chenggao, occupy the Ao Granary and close Huanyuan and Taigu, so that all the passes are held."Then General Yuan [Shu] can lead the armies from Nanyang through Dan[shui], Xi and into the Wu Pass to threaten the Three Adjuncts."In each case, we prepare strong-points, and position ourselves behind high walls and deep trenches. We avoid actual fighting, but make it appear that we are on the move, and it will appear to all the world that we are righteous men destroying rebels. Then things will settle themselves.
At this time the emperor was planning a tour of the north to his old home in Hejian. Wang Fen and his fellow conspirators planned to intercept the party with their soldiers, kill all the Regular Attendants and the officers of the Yellow Gates, then depose the emperor and set the Marquis of Hefei upon the throne.
When Yang Ci and Chen Dan were appointed as excellencies and ministers, and officials all paid them respects, they would sigh that Chen Shi was the man worthy of the highest positions, and they were ashamed to take precedence over him.
Cao Cao also appointed Cui Yan as Attendant Officer [of Jiprovince]. [331] He remarked to Cui Yan, "I have looked at thehousehold registers, and there are just on three hundred thousandfamilies. So this is a big province." "The empire is fallen asunder," replied Cui Yan, "and the twoYuan brothers took up arms against one another. All those peopleof Ji, their bones were left bleaching in the wilderness.
Before this, Cao Cao had always admired Guan Yu, but he saw onhis face that he would not stay long. He sent Zhang Liao to askGuan Yu about it, and Guan Yu sighed and said, "I know very wellhow generously Lord Cao has treated me, but I have receivedfavours from General Liu [Bei] and I swore to die with him. Icannot turn away [from that commitment], and eventually I mustleave here. I want to offer Lord Cao some assistance in return [forthe generous treatment he has given me], and then I shall go."
Beigong Boyu and his forces plundered the Three Adjuncts, and an edict ordered Huangfu Song, General of Chariots and Cavalry on the Left, to move into Chang'an and attack them.
Jiao Chu and his fellows went over to Cao Cao and they wereall enfeoffed as full marquises.
You cannot make useful plans with them. I could welcome Cao Cao, but not you.
and commandery governments, falsely claiming that He Jin had issued orders that they should place all the eunuchs' families under arrest.
"You should recall Cai Yong and restore him to office, and you should bring Duan Jiong's family and dependents back from their exile. If you do that, then loyal and honest men will see the road open before them, and the resentments of the people will be dispelled."
The WEI troops scattered and formed again, then pursued him to his camp.Zhao Yun entered the camp, threw open the gates, put the flags away and kept the drums silent.
While Zhang Liao was camped at Changshe, Yu Jin was at Yingyin and Yue Jin at Yangdi. Each acted as he saw fit, and they refused to cooperate.
Zibu [Zhang Zhao], Wenbiao [Qin Song] and the others are all concerned for their women and children, and they consider only their own interests. I am disappointed in them.Only you and Zijing [Lu Su] agree with me: Heaven has sent you to my aid.
In the twelfth month the Xianbi raided Beidi. The Administrator Xia Yu led the [Xiu]chuge [tribe of the Xiongnu] in pursuit, and defeated them.
while he did not appoint civil officials, but all weregoverned by Libationers.
Liu Bei moved Liu Zhang to Gongan, restored all his treasure, and allowed him to wear the seal and ribbon of General Who Inspires Awe.
The emperor's wet-nurse Zhao Rao, however, and the various clerks of the harem apartments, were day and night by the side of the Dowager, while the Regular Attendants Cao Jie and Wang Fu made a point of establishing good relations with her and insinuating themselves into her favour.
Liu Bei fled to Yuan Tan in Qing province and so joined YuanShao.
Xi Zuochi discusses this:It was when Liu Xuande [Liu Bei] was in difficulty and danger that he truly showed his loyalty and sense of honour. His situation was pressing and his affairs were troubled, but his words never departed from the right Way.
Yang Qiu took personal charge of the examination, and Wang Fu and the others suffered the full extent of the five torments.Wang Meng had at one time in the past been Director of Retainers, and he said to Yang Qiu, "Father and son, we are [156] both liable to execution. But there is still the principle of seniority. You may spare my father some of the pain."
On the day dingchou [7 Jul] there was an earthquake in the capital district, and there was another on the day wuyin [8 Jul].
Liu Bei appeared before his soldiers and said angrily, "I haveattacked strong enemies for Yizhou,36 and my men have exhaustedthemselves in the struggle. Yet he hoards his treasure and he ismean in rewards. Is this any encouragement to fight and die forhim?" Zhang Song wrote to Liu Bei and to Fa Zheng: "Our great planis on the point of fruition. How can you abandon us now?" ZhangSu the Administrator of Guanghan was elder brother to Zhang Song.Afraid he might be implicated, he revealed the plot to Liu Zhang.
but the Master of Writing Zheng Tai said, "Government lies in virtue, not in armies."
The Attendant of the Yellow Gates Zhao Jin of Jinyang was greedy, oppressive and lawless, and was a major source of trouble in that county.
Zhang Huan made private contact with the Wuhuan, persuading them to change sides and enter into a secret alliance with him. He had them cut off the heads of the Xiongnu and Chuge leaders,then made a surprise attack to destroy the enemy forces. All the barbarians now begged to surrender.
Now they have all come together, and although they have a con siderable force, none will take orders from another. So their armyhas no accepted leader and they can be destroyed with a singleblow. This makes the job easier, so naturally I am pleased."
Many people were afraid that their numbers were becoming too great and that it would become increasingly difficult to keep them under control; some protection should be made against them.
I have heard that when agentleman brings another into danger he must share the misfortune. Can I be the only one to survive?" He spurred his horse againstYuan Shao's army and died.
Dong Zhuo said to his Chief Clerk Liu Ai, "The armies east of the passes have often been defeated. All of them are afraid of me and can do nothing effective.
Sun Jian went back to his camp, and Dong Zhuo sent his officer Li Jue to treat with him, to make peace and arrange an alliance. He told Sun Jian to recommend junior members of his family as Inspectors or Administrators and promised to urge their appointment.
Your majesty's achievements and virtue, how truly imposing! Everyone looks to you. That is why Sun Quan, far away, calls himself your subject.
Moreover, timber is produced to the west of Long Mountain and there are the pottery kilns of Emperor Wu at Duling. If all combine their efforts, we can manage the work in a day.
"Again, there are occasions when the administrators of commanderies and the inspectors of provinces transfer from one post to another several times in the course of a single month. You should arrange for reports of their achievements so that their abilities may be assessed, and even if is not possible for men to remain in their positions as long as nine years, they should at least continue for three.
but Zhang Xiu has no established base for his army. The time will comewhen he will ask Liu Biao for provisions and Liu Biao will not beable to supply him. They will begin to fall out.
Now you, my general, hold a most important post. You should bring this worthy man to notice and right the wrong that has been done him. That is the sort of thing that people like to see."
You must get together, bar the doors of the palace apartments, take him quickly, and kill him."
He Jin had only lately come to high position, and he had always been in awe of the eunuchs. Though outwardly he seemed to be in pursuit of a great name, inwardly he lacked decision, and so the matter long remained unsettled.
If you think back to the days of the Western Capital [under Former Han], it was through false ministers seizing power that the empire was brought to ruin.
Cao Cao sent Liu Beiand his general Zhu Ling of Qinghe to intercept them.11 Yuan Shucould not get through and was forced back towards Shouchun.
At this time, however, all the people had gathered together for protection, so there was no profit in plunder. His men were defeated and suffered casualties.
Sun Ce had already settled the area east of Xuancheng, and only the sixcounties west of Jing had not yet submitted.
The men who succeeded tothe fief, however, were worthy and capable. They enlarged itsterritory and expanded the borders, so they controlled Jing andYang as far as the southern sea. The work was handed on, andfortune continued over nine hundred years.
Then they all said, "This must have been Xu Ruzi."
Sun Quan appointed Bu Zhi of Linhuai, Administrator ofPoyang, as Inspector of Jiao province. Shi Xie brought [420] his brothers to attend him and obey his orders;
He went to Tian Chou's lodging and stayed all night to persuade him, but Tian Chou realised the purpose of his discussion and refused to talk.
The barbarians of Jianwei Dependent State attacked and plundered the Chinese settlers there.
Supuyan of Liaodong, with a following of about a thousand groups, styled himself the Severe King,
Enemy scout-riders saw it, and they really believed the great army had gone away.
As an edict was issued for his arrest, Kou Rong fled into hiding and remained there several years. When an amnesty was issued, he was excluded from its benefits; he was in growing poverty and distress. Then he sent in a letter to the emperor from his place of exile, "Your majesty governs Heaven and keeps all worldly things in their proper order. You are father and mother to the people, and every person, from the moment of their first teeth, receives your virtuousinfluence.
When he [196] arrived hepresented a memorial on the faults of Han Xian and Zhang Yang.
Cao Cao said, "We can still manage for a year."
Shi Bi replied, "The former kings established the proper bounds of the empire, and drew borders to define each territory. Just as different regions have different geography, so local customs are not the same.
Cao Cao asked him why."Simply to divide them," said Jia Xu.
By this time winter had come. There was a drought, with no water for two hundred li, and the army was also short of food. They killed several thousand horses for their meat, and dug wells three hundred feet deep to get water.
Jian'an 21: 216 AD
Look at the way he speaks: he does not even pretend to courtesy towards you. He treats his superiors lightly and has no sense of respect. This [198] is one crime. Bian Zhang and Han Sui have defied the law for more than a year and now is the time to advance and punish the rebels, yet Dong Zhuo says we cannot go. He delays the army and makes the people uncertain. This is a second crime. Dong Zhuo holds an official position but has nothing to show for it, he waited a long time before he answered your summons, he acts with disrespect and holds himself high. This is the third crime.
Lü Bu and his followers climbed the White Gate Tower and the enemysoldiers were close around them. Lü Bu told his attendants to cut offhis head and send it to Cao Cao. They could not bear to do it, so hewent down and surrendered.
Now Zhang Huan is an official of Han with military appointment.He has held command of an army for two years, but has failed to pacify the bandits. He has the vain hope that with extravagant words, and by laying down arms, he may cajole an evil foe into surrender. But he is full of false excuses and empty arguments, unreliable and without a single item of proof.
I have heard of people fanning a fire to stop soup from boiling, but it is much better to take away the firewood.Though it is painful to burst an abscess, it is better than a malignant tumour.
By any code of honour, such a great reason obliged [244]me to leave him. That is the whole story of my joining Gonglu andmy breaking with him.
Ba Su went of his own accord to the county office [of his home at Gaocheng in Bohai]. When the magistrate saw him, he brought him into a side chamber, took off his own seal and ribbon [of office], and suggested they go away together.
Lu Su also toldZhuge Liang, "I am a friend of Ziyu,"
For Hou Lan's wilful and arrogant behaviour, confiscation of property is really a light penalty;
By contrast, the wisdom and strategy of Commissioner Cao are not of this world, but rather gifts from Heaven.
but he gathered more men on the march, and when he arrived at Liyang his force was five or six thousa
At this time the Senior Clerk for All Purposes in Hongnong, Du Zhong, resenting the fact that Li Yun was undergoing such punishment for his loyal words, sent in a letter to say, "I wish to die on the same day as Li Yun."The emperor's fury knew now no bounds, and he ordered that Du Zhong be also arrested and held by the Minister of Justice.
and I suggest that in future we let their wives and children go free. For one thing, this would encourage them to return to their units.
Then they had several dozen of their party take up weapons, go in quietly by a side entrance, and hide behind the doors of the private apartments.When He Jin came out, they pretended to have orders from the Dowager to call him back, so he went in and waited by the doors.
Yuan Shu appointed his younger cousin Yuan Yin as Admini strator of Danyang, a
He dismissed his attendants and said, "The house of Han is all but gone, and an evil minister is stealing the mandate. Taking no count of my limited virtue and my feeble strength, I desire to extend true justice to the empire. My wisdom and skill, however, are shallow and slight, so I sometimes act wildly and mistakenly, and now I am reduced to my present state.
Cao Cao rushed through the fire and escaped. He came to his camp and hastily encouraged the army, ordered the men to make quick preparations for an attack, and went forward once more to the assault.Cao Cao and Lu Bu faced one another for more than three months.
Since I am leaving you for such a long time, however, I can drink and feast just this once."
That night he called up seventeen eunuchs, old friends and physically strong, including the Clerks of the Attendant Office of the Palace of Prolonged Joy Gong Pu, Zhang Liang and others, and they smeared blood upon their mouths and swore an oath together to kill Dou Wu and his associates.
Someone said to Liu Bei, "Zhao Yun has fled to the north."
When the young man died at Rang, the Lady Ding refused to stop weeping and Cao Cao became angry. He sent her away and appointed the Lady Bian as his second wife.
"Han Sui's troops are well-trained and Xingguo has strong walls," judged Xiahou Yuan. "Whichever we attack, we shall gain no swift success. Much better to deal with the Qiang at Changli.
When the Qiang people heard about this, they were quite reformed, and the chieftains of the Chendi Qiang, Dianchang, Jitian and others, came once again with a hundred thousand followers to surrender to Huangfu Gui.
The Qiang tribesmen and other barbarians came constantly to stare at the gate to the emperor's lodging, saying, "Is the Son of Heaven in there? General Li promised us the palace [159] maidservants. Where are they all?"
had privately solicited a bribe of fifty million cash and Huangfu Song refused to give it.
My late father had several thousand soldiers and theywere all under Gonglu's [Yuan Shu's] command. It was my ambitionto establish a position of my own, but how could I avoid joiningGonglu if I was to ask for those troops?
Because Han Xian and Zhang Yanghad done good work as escort to his escape, however, the emperorordered that nothing more should be said.
Guan Yu sailed his ships to the walls, set up several lines of siege, and the city was cut off from outside.
The horses in the stables are in the tens of thousands;can their numbers be diminished?
Jian'an 15: 210 AD
Now think about Xiahou Yuan and Zhang He. They are no match for our officers.
Yuan Shu named Chen Yu of Xiapi as Inspector of Yang province.
On the day xinyou [17 Jul] the Xiao-Ling Emperor was buried at Wenling.
"To plan a campaign, moreover, requires more than a simplecount of numbers.
All admired the honest way that Yan Jun had refused the appointment.
The Officer of Merit Luo Tong urged Sun Quan to honour worthymen, to welcome scholars and to be diligent in seeking advice. Ondays when there were feasts and rewards every man should beallowed to come forward and have personal audience. He shouldenquire whether his lodgings were comfortable, show a personalinterest, and encourage him to talk in order to find out what was onhis mind.
You wish to do away with the son of the legal wife and set the son of a concubine in his place, but I fear the people will not accept your argument."
In the eleventh month the heretic rebel Xu Sheng of Kuaiji made a rising at Juzhang. He called himself the Emperor of the Brightness of Yang, and his forces were numbered by the tens of thousands.Zang Min the Inspector of Yang province and Chen Yin the Administrator of Danyang were sent to attack him.
Harsh and strict by nature, Chen Fan seldom gave a welcome to clients or dependent guests.When Xu Zhi came, however, he prepared a special couch for him, and when he went away he hung it up again.
He invited Liu Bei to his tent, sat him on his wife's bed and had his wife make obeisance to him. He poured wine, they ate and drank together, and he referred to Liu Bei as his younger brother.
Yan Jun and his fellows, replied Zhang Ji, "pretend to respect the authority of the state, but inwardly they are proud and perverse. When they have agreed their plans and feel strong enough, they will all rebel together.
In the spring, in the first month on the day renwu [2 Mar] there was a fire in the C-Office of the Southern Palace.
Treasure and granaries are the property of the state."
Duan Wei and the others, to punish Li Jue. They killed himand destroyed his family.1 Duan Wei was appointed General WhoGives Tranquillity to the South and enfeoffed as Marquis of MinDistrict.
When Chong Gao came to the place where the army was camped, the first thing he did was to announce the grace and good faith [of the imperial government], to encourage the barbarians to surrender.He promised that he would attack only those who failed to submit, and he sent back all Qiang prisoners who had been held as hostages by the commandery and county offices.Those who had proved loyal were well and gently treated, and rewards were granted clearly and reliably.As a result, the Qiang and the northern barbarians all came to offer their submission.
Zhang He was camped at Guangshi, and Liu Bei attacked him without success.
He quietly persuaded Bing Yuan to return home, and when Gongsun Du heard of it he made no attempt to fetch him back.
The General of the Rear Yuan Wei was appointed Grand Tutor, sharing control of the Imperial Secretariat with the General-in-Chief He Jin.
I entrust you with my head!" Jiang Yiqu gave up histent, set him in place and asked him to take over command. Whenthe soldiers heard where Yuan Shao was they gradually came back.
If his wife or one of his children did something wrong, he would take off his hat to admonish himself [for his failure in teaching or guidance]. His wife or child would stand down in the courtyard to apologise or repent for the misdeed, Qiu Xiang would put his hat on again, and only then would the culprit venture to return once more to the dais. At no time did Qiu Xiang show any change of expression for pleasure or anger.
Sun Jin, former Chancellor of Changshan, joined the officers Zhang Yi and Zhang Zan and went to Liu Yu. They laid every curse they could think of upon Gongsun Zan, then they died together with Liu Yu.Gongsun Zan sent Liu Yu's head to the capital.
When Kaifang, prince of Wei, went to take up office in Qi and did not return home for several years, Guan Zhong judged that since he did not care for his own family, how could he care for his ruler?
King Qiao held a great assembly of his leaders, and Han Zhong waspresent.
Yang Qiu, moreover, was the husband of the [adopted] daughter of the Regular Attendant Cheng Huang.
In the fifth month on the day renzi [4 Jul], last of the month, there was an eclipse of the sun.
A period of four hundred years of government is reaching its end.
The Chancellor of thekingdom, Luo Jun of Kuaiji, had also shown authority and gainedfavour in the past. At that time the kings and marquises no longer received theirrevenues. They were often robbed, some ate just once every otherday, and some even died in ditches. Only Chen was wealthy andstrong, and more than a hundred thousand people came from theneighbouring commanderies.
and was going to kill Lu Zhi. Cai Yong, however, pleaded for him, and the Consultant Peng Bo also argued, "Master of Writing Lu is a leading scholar of the empire. People look up to him. I
The common people are in constant anxiety and distress, so they rise up and join with bandit gangs. The officials do no more than send soldiers to punish them for their crimes, [paying no attention to the real causes of these disorders].
The old man came back at dusk to look for the sword and found it. He thought it remarkable [that the man should have guarded his sword for him] and he told Wang Lie about it. Wang Lie enquired further, and it turned out it was the former cattle-thief.
So the general Jia Xin was sent to deal with the rebels, and theywere swiftly defeated and destroyed.
Zhu Yu, Marquis of Huarong, realised that their activities had been discovered and that he himself would also suffer misfortune, so he set a plot for rebellion, brought disorder upon the imperial house, rampaged through [158] the palace and seized the official seals and ribbons. He put pressure upon your majesty, gathered the ministers together, and drove a wedge between the true affection of a natural mother and son. As a result, Chen Fan and Dou Wu were executed,as were Yin Xun and others.
If one of his officers or one of the people did something wrong, he would use only a whip of rushes to punish them, just to display the disgrace, and he never inflicted real pain.
Jian'an 12: 207 AD 15 Februarv 207 - 3 Februarv 208
In former times the wet-nurse Zhao Rao was honoured before all the empire, but she was a slanderer and a flatterer and displayed excessive pride. Then there was the case of Huo Yu, servant at the gate of the Palace of Perpetual Joy, who relied upon his influence with authority, and was constantly involved in wrongful dealings.
So they sat and drank wine, and after a whole day he was still not drunk.
Realising that he was cut off, Guan Yu went west to hold Maicheng.
Zhang Lu's attendants were going to bum all the stores of treasure and grain, but Zhang Lu said, "My true intention is to hand over government to the central authority, but I have not yet been able to arrange it.
I saw that the east of the passes were raising soldiers because they wanted to attack Dong Zhuo,
and in a very short time all the followers of He Jin and his brother He Miao had turned to Dong Zhuo. He also arranged in secret for Ding Yuan's own follower, the Major Lü Bu of Wuyuan, to kill Ding Yuan and take over his forces. So his army became very much stronger.
Then Sun Jian cleared out the imperial temples and held great sacrifice.He found the Great Seal of State in a well in the Pottery Office south of the city.He sent part of his force forward to Xin'an and Mianchi to threaten Dong Zhuo's defence positions.
He ordered Xu Huang to publish Sun Quan's letter both to the men inside the siege and to Guan Yu's camp. When the defenders heard about it, their spirits were raised a hundred times. Guan Yu, however, suspected it was a trick and did not withdraw.
When Yuan Shao became leader of the alliance [against Dong Zhuo] he behaved arrogantly and Zhang Miao spoke straight and told him so. Yuan Shao was angry and told Cao Cao to kill him,
In the summer, in the fourth month, Yang Ci left office because of the rebellion.
Li Jue, Guo Si and Fan Chou, boasting of their achievements and contending for power, were always on the point of quarrelling. Jia Xu exhorted them to good moral principles, and as a result, though each hated the other, they did not show their true feelings.
Dong Zhuo spoke with the emperor, but could gain no clear account of what had happened. Then he talked to the King of [19] Chenliu and asked about the causes of the misfortune and disorder. The king described events from first to last, with nothing left out,
Yu Fan went to see Hua Xin and said, "I know that both youand former Magistrate Wang [Lang] of my own commandery aremen of wide renown in the central provinces. All within the seashave heard your name, and although you have come down to theeast everyone regards you with respect." [264]
Before this, Song Jian of Fuhan had taken advantage of the disorder in Liang province to name himself King of the Sources of the River Who Will Pacify Han, proclaiming new reign-titles and appointing the hundred officials. His rebellion had lasted more than thirty years.
Yuan Shao and the others made another proposal, that the brave leaders and fighting men from all parts of the empire should lead their troops towards the capital as a means to put pressure on the Dowager. He Jin approved this.He Jin's Registrar, Chen Lin of Guangling, remonstrated with him, "There is a proverb about closing the eyes to catch a bird.Such deceit is sure to fail in small matters, and the rule must apply yet more strongly in great affairs of state. How can policy be maintained by trickery?
On the day bingxu [2 Jan 197] Cao Cao became Excellency ofWorks with acting authority as General of Chariots and Cavalry.[201]
An imperial edict ordered Huangfu Song to attack Dong commandery and Zhu Jun to attack Nanyang.
When Chen Fan heard there was trouble he gathered some eighty clerks from his office, and they made an armed attack on the Gate of Continuing Brightness. Breaking through, they reached the Gate of the Masters of Writing.
An edict appointed Liu Biao, Adjutant of the Northern Army, as Inspector of Jing province.
When the emperor asked them the reason, they would kowtow and say, "We are afraid of Director Li."
and as the cortege crossed the bridge they all called out, "Ten thousand years!"
Huangfu Gui raised the tribes of the Xianlian and other Qiang people to join in a campaign west of the Long Mountain.The roads and communications, however, were under attack and broken, there was widespread sickness in the army, and three or four out of every ten died.
An edict was sent down authorising General Chen to relieve the taxation and labour service of Bing and Liang provinces for one year, as a grant to the people.
In the eighth month Sun Quan led a hundred thousand men to besiege Hefei.
Zhuge Liang saw Sun Quan at Chaisang and said to him, "All within the seas is in confusion. You have raised soldiers east of the Yangzi, Liu Yuzhou [Liu Bei] has collected an army south of the Han, and together we are fighting Cao Cao for the empire.
Fa Zheng said, "Many men obtain an empty reputation without true worth, and Xu Jing is one of them.
"As to our present emperor, he has done no wrong to the empire. It is only that he is young and small, and is at the mercy of mighty subjects. This is different to the time of Tang and Wu.
Cao Pi was afrai d and asked Wu Zhi, but Wu Zhi replied, "Nothing to worry about."
Later, when Yuan failedto respect the proper conduct of a minister, I objected but he refusedto listen.
In the eleventh month [?] the Excellency of Works Chen Qiu left office.
Zhao Yan, however, argued that, "Sun Quan has taken advantage of the fact that Guan Yu was vulnerable, with his forces comitted elsewhere, and has sent a surprise attack against his rear."When he sees Guan Yu coming back to the relief he will be afraid we may take advantage of both of them. He will therefore address us very politely, and request our full support. Then he will simply let our people do the fighting and stand by to watch the result.
Cheng Ji replied [to hisson], "None of our people have caused any trouble, and no matterwhat slanders are spoken [to Liu Zhang], we must stay absolutelyloyal. Should [Pang Xi] have any plan for rebellion, I would notdare follow him."
Li Gao sought to arrest Su Buwei but could not find him. Frustrated and furious, he spat blood and died.
In the winter, in the eleventh month Zang Min and Chen Yinthoroughly defeated Xu Sheng in Kuaiji and killed him.
But instead your majesty has entrusted authority to inexperienced officials, and you have given responsibility to creatures like the greedy Taotie. Outside they control provinces and commanderies, inside they manage the personal affairs of your palace. You should dismiss each and every one of them, investigate their crimes and subject them to punishment.Give your trust to loyal and honourable men, and make proper judgement between good and bad, so that right and wrong, praise and blame are each given their appropriate place. It is the golden rule that you should consider only the public interest, and make judgements purely on the basis of who is the best, not upon personal favour. In this way, bad omens can be averted and you may expect to receive the favour of Heaven.
With your spiritual wisdom, taking advantage of their weakness to destroy them, there is nothing you cannot manage.
Now it was the Dowager alone who decided matters within the inner apartments of the palace and brought your sage-like excellence to the throne. The Classic of History says:The crimes of father or son, younger or elder brother, do not reach beyond the individual himself.
The General of Peace and Harmony, Duan Wei, set out his clothing and possessions for the emperor and made provision for the high ministers and other officials. He wanted the emperor to come to his camp.
but Fa Zheng replied, "There is nothing to worry about. LiuZhang will never use such methods."
Liu Bei promoted Shen Dan to be General Who Subdues the North, still holding office as Administrator of Shangyong, and he named Shen Dan's younger brother Yi as General Who Establishes Trust and Administrator of Xicheng.
"Honour and shame are the essence of reward and punishment.
How many soldiers will you need? Take as many as youlike."
His attendants Xu Tuoand others planned to kill him.
The word spread about, and the Administrator, seeking a good reputation,
Yuan Shu attacked Liu Bei to fight for Xu province.
Chen Fan, Director of the Secretariat, recommended five scholars living in retirement: Xu Zhi of Yuzhang, Jiang Gong of Pengcheng, Yuan Hong of Runan, Wei Zhu of Jingzhao and Li Tan of Yingchuan.
In the winter, in the tenth month, the Yellow Turbans of Qing and Xu provinces made another rising, and ravaged commanderies and counties.
Shen Peifought them in the streets, but Cao Cao's men captured him alive.
If you punish the wicked [among the local leaders], cherish the others and give them appointments, then all the people of the province will feel contented and secure "When they hear of your authority and your virtue, they will come with their children strapped to their backs.
Now Sun Ce came back to attack Chen Deng.When his army arrived at Dantu and he called a brief halt to wait forsupplies.
Yuan Shu was embarrassed, and he immediately sent up supplies for the army.
"Since the time of Emperors Huan and Ling the governmenthas declined through excessive indulgence. Yuan Shao is weak willed and excessively lenient, and he does not maintain a firmrule. You, however, keep control of your people, so that every one, high or low, knows the rules. This is superior government.
Cao Cao recommended that Hua Xin be called for appointment asConsultant and Adviser to the Army of the Excellency of Works.
Someone urged him to support Yuan Shao, but Li Tong put his hand to hissword and swore at him, "Lord Cao is wise and he will certainlysettle the empire. Though Yuan Shao is strong, Cao Cao will takehim in the end.
On these three points you are at a disadvantage: how can you cope with him?
And before this, the Chancellor of Pengcheng, Xue Li, driven out by Tao Qian, had set camp at Moling.Zhai Rong was greedy for the wealth and goods of Guangling, so he murdered Zhao Yu at a drinking party, let loose his soldiers to plunder far and wide, then crossed the Yangzi to join Xue Li. Later he killed him too.
When Guan Yu attacked Fan, Lü Meng sent in a memorial, "Guan Yu is driving north, but he has left a strong guard behind. He is naturally concerned that I may threaten his rear.
Lü Bu glared at Liu Bei. "Big-ears," he said, "you're a crook!"
If, on the other hand, you govern badly and inflict arbitrary punishments, I shall not be the only person who is afraid."
The emperor asked the Grand Commandant Yang Ci for his opinion of the Yellow Turban outbreak. Yang Ci replied in straight-forward fashion, very much to the point, and the emperor was not pleased.
The Lejie and Lianyu tribes of the Qiang besieged Yuanjie.17 Duan Jiong attacked and destroyed them.
Ma Xiang, Zhao Zhi, and other bandits of Yi province raised troops at Mianzhu, styled themselves Yellow Turbans, and killed the Inspector Que Jian. They went on to attack Ba commandery and Jianwei, and within a few weeks they had defeated and destroyed the forces of three commanderies. Their army was several ten thousand men, and Ma Xiang called himself Son of Heaven.
"Yuan Benchu had no good ideas," said Cao Cao, "and herefused your advice. There is still disorder and confusion, and Ishould be glad of your assistance."
Yin and Yang are forced from their proper seasons, the work of farming is disordered and confused, the affairs of men go awry, and the pattern of nature is disturbed.
Chong Ji asked persistently, even up to midnight, but the emperor still refused.
In government, the right way was not followed, so that even true Chinese were stirred up like a swarm of bees and so brought to rebellion and banditry. Should they too have all been executed?
and the emperor ordered him to recommend those who had done good work in the wars against the Yellow Turbans.Zhen Ju, the Bearer of the Mace, said to Zhao Zhong, "Fu Nanrong was with the armies in the east and did well, but he never received a fief. Many people in the empire were discouraged that such a man failed to gain recognition.
An imperial edict re-appointed Zhang Huan as General of the Household Protector of the Xiongnu, with the salary of one of the Nine Ministers, and with command over [the troops of] the three provinces You, Bing and Liang, and over the two forces [under the General Who] Crosses the Liao and [the Protector of the] Wuhuan. He was also given authority to examine the competence of the inspectors and administrators.
Huang Zu had set two ships covered with ox-hide to guard the channel across Miankou, [moored by] a great rope of coir-palm fibre, with stones attached as anchors. Above this were a thousand men with crossbows to give covering fire. Arrows poured down like rain, and the army could not get forward.
I should simply be content if I have borne a son without fault in teaching or guidance. Why should I give great presents?"
The Palace Attendant Liu Yu, who had long been expert in astrology, was very concerned at this, and he sent in a letter to the Dowager, saying, "I note that according to books of divination the gates of the palace should be kept closed.[This is a time when] military and civil officials are at a disadvantage, and evil men are at the side of the ruler. I would wish you to take urgent measures to guard against it."
He was appointed General Who Maintains the South in Peace and Governor of Jing province, and was enfeoffed as Marquis of Chengwu.
but they continued to starve and die. The emperor suspected the issue had not been correctly made. Five sheng each of the grain and beans were brought to his presence to make gruel and only two dishes were obtained.
In affairs of the present day, people entrust them to the man who is most competent.
Zhou Yu returned to Jiangling to prepare for the expedition, buton the way he became seriously ill. He sent a message to Sun Quan,"Whether life is long or short is a matter of fate, nothing to make afuss about.
"Yuan Shao has many soldiers," replied Xun Yu, "but hisgovernment is not well-ordered. Tian Feng is stubborn and insub ordinate; Xu You is greedy and ill-disciplined. Shen Pei is self opinionated and lacks original ideas; Pang Ji is too adventurous andindependent. People like that find it hard to co-operate, and theywill certainly disrupt his councils.
Both worked hard for many years, yet they lost it all in a nod. Is that not sad?
Meng Tuo replied, "I should be pleased if you would simply bow to me."
Guan Ning and Bing Yuan were both celebrated for their integrity, and Gongsun Du always kept a lodging-house empty and ready for them.
"When a state loses its worthy men," responded Cao Cao, "itwill be destroyed. Yuan Shu never gave you any official position,and it is only appropriate that he should fall."
Refusing to accept the edict, Dou Wu fled to the camp of the Regiment of Footsoldiers. With his nephew the Colonel of Footsoldiers Dou Shao he shot and killed some of the messengers [who were attempting to arrest him].
Before they have gathered their forces, go quickly to attack Wu Lan.
Sun Quan sent the Commandant Xu Xiang to ask Cao Cao for terms. Cao Cao agreed to restore friendly relations, and they renewed the marriage alliance.
If anyone is punished for bringing help too late, I shall take full responsibility."
Qiu Xiang replied, "To act as an eagle or a hawk is not as good as being a phoenix. That is why I took no legal action against him."
Xu Si and Wang Kai replied, "If Your Excellency does not helpLü Bu now, you will be bringing ruin upon yourself.
Cao Cao is at present far away to the north of the Yellow River, answered Lü Meng. "He is collecting You and Ji provinces and has not yet had time to look to the east. I am told the troops guarding Xu territory are too few to be of any significance, so if you go there you can take them.
Zhang Jian recommended that a memorial should be sent to the court about Hou Lan's wrong-doing, but Hou Lan had agents to intercept such messages, and the documents did not arrive.
The possibilities of victory and defeat rest on this day!"
Whenever the Dowager Dong sought to interfere in matters of government the Dowager He always stopped her. The Lady Dong was furious and shouted, "You are powerful now because you rely on your brother! But I can order the General of Agile Cavalry to cut off He Jin's head, and that would be easy as turning my hand!"
The emperor sent special comfortable carriages, with black and crimson harness and full ceremonial,to invite each of them, but they all declined.
You need only follow the road of humanity and justice and the people will turn to you like water hurrying downwards. Why need you worry whether soldiers may rally to you?"
In the sixth month on the day gengshen [12 Jul] there was an amnesty for the empire and the reign title was changed [to Yongkang].All the men of faction, more than two hundred, were sent back to their home territories. Their names were recorded at the offices of the Three Excellencies, and they were barred from appointment for the rest of their lives.
but Xiahou Dun went up to see for himself. He came back and told Cao Cao, so they sent men forward to attack. Zhang Wei and his officers fled during the night.
"but a lesser man keeps to his duty. I keep to my duty. Oncethe name of master and servant has been settled, it must be held tothe death.
If I take a small advantage now, yet lose myname for faith and honour, what good is that?""In times of disorder," replied Pang Tong, "one must be adapt able.
When Hou Meng was first appointed Administrator of Liaodong, he refused to pay a courtesy call upon Liang Ji.Liang Ji found some other excuse to attack him, and he was executed by being cut in two at the waist.
Taking the head of Yan Gang, the Inspector of Ji province appointed by Gongsun Zan, and killing more than a thousand armed men,
[In the third month] on the day gengyin [11 Apr]3 an edict combinedthe fourteen provinces to make nine again.
So Wang Cheng took Li Xie away to the east, down the Yangzi into Xu province.Li Xie changed his name and became a servant in a wine shop, while Wang Cheng told fortunes in the market-place.Each pretended to be a stranger to the other, and they would visit only in secret.
The occasions may vary, and relative strengths may be different; some operations are successful and some are not; and plans may be good or bad. One cannot expect the result will always be the same.
Wang Kuang, Senior Clerk in He Jin's offices, and the Commandant of Cavalry Bao Xin both came from Taishan. He Jin sent them back to their home country to raise troops, and he called the Admini- strator of Dong commandery, Qiao Mao, to camp at Chenggao. He sent Ding Yuan, Commandant Who is Martial and Brave, to lead several thousand men to ravage Henei and burn Mengjin.35 The fire could be seen from the capital. All this was done under pretext that they sought to punish the eunuchs.
So Ding Yi had a grudge against Cao Pi. With his younger brother Ding I, Gentleman at the Yellow Gates, and Yang Xiu who was Registrar to the Imperial Chancellor, he often praised the abilities of Cao Zhi, Marquis of Linzi, and they urged Cao Cao to make Zhi his successor.
All the people between the Huai and the Ru, and those in Chen andLiang, respected and feared him.
"Tell me at five paces."
In the intercalary [first] month some remnant groups of the Western Qiang again joined with the leaders of the Shaohe to attack Zhangye.At dawn, they came upon the army of the Protector Duan Jiong.
In the winter, in the tenth month the Excellency over the Masses Yuan Wei left office.In the eleventh month on the day bingx-u [17 Dec?], the Household Counsellor Yang Ci became Excellency over the Masses.
Tanshihuai died and his son Helian succeeded him.
"My master had pity for Yuzhou, that he had no place to rest. He was generous with land and fighting men, and gave [Liu Bei] everything he needed to protect himself and to relieve his danger.
The Excellency of Works Chen Dan left office. The Minister of Ceremonies Lai Yan became Excellency of Works.
Zhao Yan sent them all off down the road on the same day. The thousand men due to remain behind were ordered to escort those who were leaving and keep them in order.
In the spring, in the third month on the day bingyin [3 May], last of the month, there was an eclipse of the sun.
"When I have a master, I work for him. So if I hold appoint ment from the Son of Heaven, I can no longer serve [260] you to thedeath.
Cao Jie, Coachman of the Palace of Prolonged Joy,became seriously ill. By imperial edict he was appointed General of Chariots and Cavalry.
"The Grand Commandant Zhang Hao was recommended by Huo Yu. The Minister of the Imperial Household Wei [or Xing] Zhang has a reputation for greed and corruption. And the Colonel of the Chang River Regiment Zhao Xuan and the Colonel of Footsoldiers He Sheng have both received timely favours and abundant good fortune. They should think on the calamities which come of putting petty men in office, and consider how they might attract good fortune by seeking to withdraw themselves and bring worthy men out from seclusion.
And he wrote on a separate page,"I shall have no peace, my friend, until you are dead."
Cao Cao went to see Xu Shao and asked him, "What sort of a person am I?"
He recommended Li Shu of Runan as Administrator of Lujiang,gave him three thousand soldiers to hold Huan city, and brought allthe people he had captured east to Wu.
Dong Zhuo also announced, "The Dowager made the Lady of the Palace of Perpetual Joy [the Dowager Dong] uneasy and miserable, and even caused her to die of grief. This is contrary to the proper behaviour of a daughter-in-law to a mother."
As Sun Quan came near, they opened the instructions and read, "If Sun Quan comes, Generals Zhang and Li go out to fight, General Yue keeps guard, the Protector of the Army does not fight."
Han Sui was at Xianqin. Xiahou Yuan planned a surprise attack to capture him, but Han Sui fled.
As a result, groups of the Chendi Qiang of Shang commandery and the Xianlian Qiang of Anding made combined attacks on Wuwei and Zhangye. All Chinese positions along the border were seriously affected.
If only your majesty would pay heed, and apply your clear intelligence. Then everything would be brought to light, and the anxious feelings of both men and spirits would be allayed.
Yuan Shao agreed, he wrote promptly to Gongsun Zan,
In the ninth month Cao Cao withdrew his men from Liucheng.
In the sixth month on the day dingchou [31 Jul] a black emanation resembling a dragon, more than a hundred feet long, came down in the Eastern Court of the Hall of Gentle Virtue at a time when the emperor was present.
In the third month there was a comet in the east.
Later Liu Zhang's officers Fu Jin and Xiang Cun and others led some ten thousand men up from the Lang River to attack Huo Jun, and they besieged him for almost a year.
nd when there was further talk of reconciliation, he agreed. Each took a daughter as hostage.
Yuan Shao now closed the gates of the Northern Palace and ordered his soldiers to seize and slaughter all the eunuchs, without regard for young or old. Altogether some two thousand people died, including several whole men who had no beards and were killed by mistake.
replied Yuan Shao, "then I can judge which is best."
On several occasions Chen Fan had described how Li Ying, Feng Gun and Liu You had been wrongly treated, and he asked that they should be pardoned, given noble rank and high office.
the Annals of Emperor Xian(1 February, 192 - 18 February 1931)
Just before Chengdu surrendered, Xu Jing was planning to cross the wall and join the besiegers. Liu Bei accord ingly thought little of him and was reluctant to give him an appoint ment.
Qiao Xuan said to Cao Cao, "The empire will fall into disorder and only a man with ability to command the age will be able to deal with it.
Sun Ce made Zhang Hong Colonel of Upright Counsel and Zhang Zhao of Pengcheng was Chief Clerk. One would remain at base while the other accompanied the army on campaign. Qin Song, Chen Duan and other men of Guangling took part in planning.
Yet all the empire joined in hatred of him. This would apply still more to someone who imitated him and acted even worse!
Lu Bu went to Shengshi, but he was defeated by Li Jin of that county and went east to camp in Shanyang.
"It is my firm opinion, however, that Lord Cao will achieve hisdesign for the empire.
In the intercalary month Cao Cao went north from the TongPass to cross the Yellow River.
"At present, in your wisdom and generosity, you cannot bear to hand him over to judgement, but this way there is no means to decide whether he is innocent or guilty."
And are you equal to Liu Bei?
and I have scores of camps, watchtowers and pickets, with three million hu of stored grain.
Liu Bei went back and set his capital at Chengdu. He appointed Xu Jing as Grand Tutor,Fa Zheng became Director of the Secretariat, Guan Yu became General of the Van, Zhang Fei became General of the Right, Ma Chao became General of the Left and Huang Zhong became General of the Rear. All his officers were granted some promotion.
What you say is true, replied Lü Meng, "but I am very ill."
Li Jue believed in the arts of shamen and wizards and in the use of black magic to ward off ill fortune, and he regularly offered the triple sacrifice to Dong Zhuo outside the gate of the palace.
Sun Ce sent his Colonel of Upright Counsel Zhang Hong to bringproduce from his territory as tribute to the court. Cao Cao wantedSun Ce as an ally, so he recommended him as General WhoExterminates Rebels and enfeoffed him as Marquis of Wu. He senthis younger brother's daughter to marry Sun Ce's younger brotherKuang and took Sun Ben's daughter for his son Cao Zhang.
The Excellency over the Masses Yang Biao said, "To shift the capital and to change the laws are great affairs of the empire. In ancient times Pan'geng moved to Bo and the people of Yin all resented it.
Wang Chang was most impressed, and he changed the manner of his government to one of respect and tolerance. His influence spread very wide.
As a result the reputations of the two men were punctured and the numbers of their followers dwindled away.Within a couple of weeks, they had fled away in shame and embarrassment. Later, for one fault or another, they both suffered public rejection.
My successor will certainly think I was too strict, and will treat them more gently.
Liu Yao went to attack him and Zhai Rong was defeated. He fled into the mountains and was killed by the people there.
"We can then take Xiangyang, putting pressure on Cao Cao,and after that we can make plans to deal with the north."
Some time later, Yuan Shao sent a messenger to Zhang Miao to discuss plans with him, and the messenger whispered something to Zhang Miao while Han Fu was present. Convinced that they were plotting against him, Han Fu got up soon afterwards, went to the lavatory and killed himself there with a writing-knife.
Liu Yan was made Governor of Yi province, the Minister Coachman Huang Wan became Governor of Yu province, and the Minister of the Imperial House Liu Yu of Donghai became Governor of You province.
So Cao Cao recommended Zhong Yao as Palace Attendant withconcurrent appointment as Director of [215] Retainers, bearing theStaff of Authority to command all the armies within the passes. Hewas given particular instructions to act [on his own initiative]unimpeded by rules and procedures.
"Yuan Shao is strong," observed Zhang Xiu. "Cao Cao is weak,and I have quarrelled with him. How can we join him?"
Next day Liu Bei wanted to attack across the Han.The officers [of WEI] believed their army was too weak to match the enemy, and they wanted to form ranks to guard the bank against him.
Yuan Tan the Inspector of Qing province attacked Kong Rong,and they fought from the spring to the summer. Only a fewhundred fighting men remained to him, and arrows filled the air, butKong Rong reclined on an armrest to study, and he talked andlaughed unconcerned.
An imperial edict ordered the Commandant of Jiuzhen, Wei Lang,to attack the rebels and destroy them.
Cheng Pu considered himself senior to Zhou Yu [and thusentitled to higher position]. He frequently insulted Zhou Yu, butZhou Yu disregarded their official ranks and always treated ChengPu with respect, never responding to his taunts.
The [new] Officer of Merit Zong Ziqing said to Hou Yin,"You accord with the people's hearts, and you have taken up a great affair. All men far and near attend your actions. Yet you still hold the head of the commandery. That is an act of rebellion which gains you nothing. Why not send him away?"
Wei Gu and his fellows pretended they were asking for Wang Yibecause of his good reputation, but in fact they were in secretcontact with Gao Gan.
"I have heard,"replied Chen Gong, "that a man who rules the empire by his feelingsas a dutiful son will not harm another man's family. Whether mymother lives or not, that rests with you, not with me."
Then the emperor did choose new inspectors for You and Bing provinces, and great numbers of officials, garrison commanders, commandery administrators, commandants and below, were replaced.
Liu Bei set his Major Zhang Fei to hold Xiapi while he himself led a force to oppose Yuan Shu at Xuyi and Huaiyin. They faced one another for a whole month without any result.
WhenSun Quan took position as a general his officers and attendantscontinued to treat him with no more than ordinary courtesy, butZhou Yu was the first to pay him full respect and to observe theceremonies as his minister.
"On the other hand, should anyone suggest that I give up my[413] army, hand over my power, and retire to my fief at Wuping,then that just cannot be.
When Taishi Ci had left, people still argued it had been a badidea to send him.
The emperor was at this time aged fourteen sui. He questioned Cao Jie and his fellows, "What does it mean, 'to form a clique'?"
Liang Xi put forward recommendations of scholars such as Chang Lin, Yang Jun, Wang Xiang and Xun Wei of Henei, and Wang Ling of Taiyuan, men who had left their homes and come for refuge in his territory. Cao Cao gave them appointments as county magistrates, and each of them later became famous.
Wang Lang, completelysurprised, sent Zhou Xin the former Administrator of Danyang withtroops to oppose the attack. Sun Ce defeated them and took theheads of Zhou Xin and others.
The imperial ancestraltemple and the national altars were established for the first time atXu city.
Han Sui and the other leaders deposed Wang Guo and forced the former magistrate of Xindu, Yan Zhong of Hanyang, to take overall command of their forces.
Kong Rong had quarrelled earlier with Chi Lü, and with Cao Cao's encouragement Chi Lü now built a case against him. He had the Libationer Planner to the Army of the Chancellor, Lu Cui, send in a memorial to say that, "When Kong Rong was in Beihai he saw at that the royal house was in trouble, so he called an army together and sought to plan rebellion.
And had him beaten. Zhu Ling looked up at him and said, "Fan Pang is a man of rigorous honesty. Even if you flog me to death, I will not change my mind, and I shall continue to accept his lead on this matter."
"If we keep the rule as before, it removes any expectation they may be pardoned, while if you increase the penalty I am afraid that when soldiers see one of their comrades desert they will be afraid the executions may soon affect them too; and they will all run away. Even if you want to kill them, they will no longer be there.
The General Who Inspires Awe Cheng Yu was at Juancheng [274]with a garrison of seven hundred men.
There was a chant among the students: A model for the empire, Li Yuanli, Unafraid of powerful enemies, Chen Zhongqu, Ideal for the empire, Wang Shumao.
In the fifth month Liu Biao sent soldiers to help Zhang Xiu.They camped at Anzhong and guarded the passes to block theretreat.
This is not the whole camp in mutiny. It is just a few men making noise to throw others into panic."
if I presume on that too long he will make plans to harm me.
"If we consider the last rulers of the Three Dynasties, they were vicious and had no chastity: the Yang force was exhausted above, and the Yin force was isolated below. It was for this reason that the Duke of Zhou made the admonition: 'How few of them enjoyed a long career.'
Sun Quan had appointed the General Who Pacifies Caitiffs, Zhou Tai, to hold command at Ruxu. Zhu Ran, Xu Sheng and others were all under his orders, but because Zhou Tai was a man of humble family they refused to obey him.
Try to get help from the leaders east of the passes. Urge them to think of the nation."
Mao Qin got up and set Li Du's mind at rest, saying, "Qu Boyu was reluctant to act alone as a true gentleman. Why do you insist on a monopoly of good and worthy behaviour?"
Later, when Yuan Shao fled, he saidagain, "If Yuan Shao had accepted the advice of his AttendantOfficer, everything would still be in the balance."
After Yuan Shu turned back to the south Zhu Ling returned.
and Dong Xi himself cut the two mooring ropes with his sword. The enemy ships were swept sideways downstream and the main body of Sun Quan's forces could now go forward.
Survival and fall are the cyclical fate of dynasties, just as good order and rebellion follow one upon the other. This is the great constant of the Way of Heaven.
An imperial edict ordered the Director of Retainers Liu Meng to search out and arrest those responsible, and to report results every ten days.
These five, moreover, had partisans and supporters spread across half the empire, with every rank from the black seal-ribbon down to the most junior official.More than a hundred of them were implicated by association.
Furthermore, though the Dowager has residence in the Southern Palace, she is not being treated with appropriate grace and courtesy. None of the ministers at court will raise this matter, but people everywhere are concerned and upset.
Wang Kuang was camped at Heyang Crossing. Dong Zhuo made a surprise attack and completely defeated him.
On the day jiayin [14 Jan] Sun Ce fought and completely defeated them,cutting off the head of Han Xi.
"You understand half the matter," replied Zhuge Liang, "but not the whole.
In the winter, in the tenth month, Cao Cao came to Dong'a.
Xu Shao left his home [in Runan commandery] to go to Guangling and Tao Qian received him with utmost courtesy. Xu Shao, however, said to his followers, "Tao Gongzu [Tao Qian] appears to admire people of my quality, but he is not genuine. Though he treats me generously, he will not always be in so agreeable."
Cao Caorejected this advice, however, and he besieged Zhang Xiu at Rang.
After only one year as Shanyu the Gudu Marquis of the Xubu clan died. As a result, the southern court had no-one in the office and an old king carried out the affairs of the state.
On one occasion the emperor wanted to climb the Observation Terrace in the Palace of Perpetual Peace, but the eunuchs were frightened he would see their mansions. They sent the harem official Shang Dan to say, "The Son of Heaven must never climb high, for if he does so his people will be impoverished and scattered."
The King has named Pi as successor because he is the eldest, replied the Lady. "
There are men who can show a little wisdom in some things but great foolishness in others. How shall we judge them?
Indeed, I am afraid the day may suddenly come when a few corvée labourers or helpless artisans will rise up from the work-place where they have been held confined, will cast aside their tools and bare their arms for battle, will climb up high andcall out afar;and then all the people who are angry and distressed will respond to them like the gathering of cloud.
and Li Jue was pleased, thinking that he had truly gained his favour.
The eunuchs had an old enmity for Feng Gun.In the eighth month he was adjudicated for the fact that the rebels and bandits [of Wuling] had rebelled again after he had brought his army back.Feng Gun was dismissed.
The emperor was in the habit of laying by money and treasure for himself. He arranged that all valuable goods from the empire, and all tribute sent in from the commanderies and kingdoms, went first to the inner palace. He took a share for himself and called it his commission.11
Yuan Shao pressed his men forward to climb theterraces, and they cut off Gongsun Zan's head.
Zhang Yang sent Dong Cheng to restore the palaces at Luoyang,
Liu Yao was going to retreat from Dantu to Kuaiji, but Xu Shao said, "Kuaiji is rich, which is what Sun Ce covets, and it is squeezed into a corner of the sea. Don't go there.
"Lord of Longshu" refers to Fan Pang's father, Fan Xian, who had been Chancellor of the marquisate of Longshu.
I am used to isolation and danger, and from my humble observation of commandery leadership over the last twenty or thirty years, from Niaoshu to Dongdai the problem of rebellion is always the same.
Since the beginning of your majesty's reign, there have been continual executions. The Liang, Kou, Sun and Deng families have all been destroyed, and great numbers of their associates, far too many to count, have shared their fate.
So he took refuge in the region of Liang and Tang, built a house in the trees, and lived in the same fashion as the labourers.
Now, however, Heaven is displaying strange signs, earth spits forth uncanny creations, and mankind has pestilence and disease. With these three situations all together, even if we still have the Yellow River running clear,
You and his majesty are so close you might have a single body, you feel the same joys and the same sorrows, you share good fortune and ill.
Cao Cao sent his general Zhang Xi with troops to break the siege,but it was going to be a long time before he arrived.
Now that Guan Yu is isolated and in flight, we should keep him as a threat to Sun Quan.
Because the bandits and rebels had not been pacified, the Grand Commandant Zhang Wen left office. The Excellency over the Masses, Cui Lie, was made Grand Commandant.
all the bad elements of the past were eliminated, and wherever he went everything was set in good order. He returned to camp at Wuhu.
Yan Jun of Wuwei, He Luan of Zhangye, Huang Hua of Jiuquan and Qu Yan of Xiping had seized control as warlords in their commanderies, styling themselved as generals and fighting one another.
The Lady Xuan, wife of the Gentleman of the Palace Deng Xiang,who was a cousin of the Fortunate Empress [Deng] of Emperor He,had a daughter named Meng.20 Deng Xiang died, and Xuan remarried,this time to Liang Gi,21 who was the maternal uncle of [Liang Ji's wife]Sun Shou.
Dong Zhuo recommended that the Intendant of Henan, Zhu Jun, become Minister Coachman and act as his Assistant. A messenger brought the summons to office, but Zhu Jun excused himself and would not accept. Then he said, "If the emperor moves west, he will surely destroy the hopes of the empire, because he will be confirming the rift with the east of the mountains. I see no advantage in it."
He Xun had fewer than a hundred men with him and he had been wounded three times. He sat down, refusing to move, and pointed to a wooden mile-pillar, saying, "Let my body rest here."
Though Chencang is small, its defences are strong and in good order; it will not be easy to capture.
Cao Ren gathered his officers for a council of war, and everyone said, "Guan Yu is threatened and anxious. We can chase him and take him."
I have reckoned my forces and made careful plans for attack. The city will fall in less than a day. When the city is destroyed and He Pu is dead, what use is that to anyone? And isn't it sad that his mother, now approaching the age of a hundred years, may be done to death at the same time?
Yuan Shao made Meng Dai Supervisor of the Army, to takeShen Pei's place in command of the garrison at Ye.
In the second month on the day xinhai, first of the month [7 Mar], there was an eclipse of the sun.
When the river that should be muddy has instead turned clear, that is a sign that Yin wishes to become Yang and feudal lords seek to become emperor.
Considering that he had now held one high post after another, Huangfu Gui wanted very much to retire. He sent in several reports pleading ill health, but his requests were not granted.
Then Liu Ye turned the troops over to Liu Xun the Admini strator of Lujiang. Liu Xun asked him why, and Liu Ye explained,"Zheng Bao ruled lawlessly and his men found profit in plunder.
Chen Fan sent in one further letter of very strong protest. The emperor took no account of his insubordinate language, but dismissed him on the grounds that he had summoned unworthy men to court.
In the eleventh month, Feng Gun's army came to Changsha.When the rebels heard of it, they all came to the camp and asked to surrender.
The former Director of the Secretariat Chen Ji and his son ChenQun had both been with Lü Bu's army. Cao Cao treated them withcourtesy and used them in office.
Dong Zhuo advised the Grand Tutor Yuan Wei of his intention to depose the emperor, and Yuan Wei gave his consent.
He Hai, magistrate of Shanglu county, sent in a letter saying,"According to the Rites, cousins descended from the same great grandfather should live apart and have separate property. The favour and courtesy they pay one another is slight, and the connection is very distant.
They replied, "You well know that Liu [Emperor Gao of Han]was no match for the power of Xiang [Yu].
And heasked for ten thousand more soldiers, with money and supplies [toassist the campaign in defence of Jing province]. Liu Zhang,however, allowed him only four thousand men, and half the otherthings he had asked for.
At this time, however, Xu Zhi came to join the mourning: he went forward to pour out the libation, and he cried out in sorrow before he left the assembly.No-one knew who he was.
Then he wrote to Xun Yu, "The people of Yang'an are poor anddistressed, neighbouring cities are in rebellion, and our governmentcould easily be overthrown. Here is a time of crisis for the region.
And by the time Cheng Yu came to Dong'a the magistrate there, Zao Zhi of Yingchuan, had already taken command and had trained the people to guard the walls and hold firm. So Cheng Yu managed to keep all three cities safe for Cao Cao.
There is the story: In reports of defeats of rebels, one was countedas ten,
When the men came back from the hunt, every one of them wept for sorrow.
In the autumn, in the seventh month Duke Cao ofWEI attacked Sun Quan. He left his younger son Zhi, Marquis of Linzi, in charge at Ye.
The magistrate of Waihuang, Mao Qin, came with troops to the gate.Li Du brought Mao Qin inside to sit down and said, "Zhang Jian has run away from his punishment. Why should I shelter him?
Before he could get there, however, the Inspector [of You province] Zhang Jing sent in a document of impeachment, claiming Kou Rong was planning to cross the frontier illegally.
Do you doubt the temper of my sword?"
On the day gengzi [23 Jul] Mount Tai and [the neighbouring peak of] Youlai Mountain in Bo county both split and cracked open.
The emperor said, "Some time ago, Zhu Yun broke the railings at the audience hall. Now you have criticised me to my face. I must respect and accept your rebuke on my shortcomings."
Before this, Zhou Yu had been the friend of Sun Ce, and Sun Quan'smother always told him to treat Zhou Yu as an elder brother.
About this time Sun Quan came to Jiangling, and the military and civil officers of Jing province came to attend him. Only the Headquarters Officer Pan Jun of Wuling claimed to be sick and refused to come to audience.
In the spring, in the first month Cao Ren stormed Wan. He sacked the city, took the head of Hou Yin, and returned to camp at Fan.
"On the other hand, if you make an unnecessary levy of troops to frighten the empire, then you will cause all the people who are afraid of being conscripted to collect together and rebel. You would be abandoning virtue to rely upon force, and you would lose both authority and prestige."
"Though I realise I may cause you displeasure by speaking too much about this, I feel I must give you my opinion. When the state is at peace, a minister may enjoy the good fortune, but when danger approaches he should be willing to sacrifice himself.
He Xun said to Yuan Shao, "His majesty is intelligent, but he is deceived by those about him."
The emperor had a great many favourites in the palace, and his concubines numbered five or six thousand, with twice as many handmaids and servants besides. The Empress Deng was a woman of great arrogance and pride, and she quarrelled with the Honoured Lady Guo, whom the emperor had favoured.
King Cao of WEI had appointed Wang Bi, Chief Clerk [in his office as] Imperial Chancellor, to hold command of troops and general administration about Xu city.
The Yellow Turban rebels of Runan, led by Liu Pi, turned from CaoCao to support Yuan Shao. Yuan Shao sent Liu Bei to bring soldiersto help them, and many of the commanderies and counties joinedhim.
I believe we can arrange an acceptable transfer of power which would still protect your noble house."
He sent Guan Yu separately in a fleet with hundreds of ships to wait for him at Jiangling.Someone said to Liu Bei: "You should go quickly to defend Jiangling. Though you have a great number of people with you, few of them are men at arms. If Lord Cao's soldiers catch up, how will you cope with them?"
The enemy were in great numbers, and Duan Jiong's men were frightened.
In the Book of Changes, once is a mistake, twice is going further in, and if a third time there is still no change then overwhelming misfortune will come. T
The enemy were startled and terrified. They trampled one another down as they fled, and a great number fell into the Han and died.
In the spring, in the first month the Excellency over the Masses Zhao Wen recommended Cao Cao's son Cao Pi for office.
In fear and dread, Zhang Rang and the others clasped fingers, bowed twice and kowtowed towards the emperor, "Now we must die. May Your Majesty maintain yourself." They threw themselves into the river and drowned.
In the spring Ma Chao asked Zhang Lu for soldiers so that he could go north and recapture Liang province, and Zhang Lu sent him off to besiege Qi Mountain.
From the highest rank to thelowest, everyone was sad and disappointed, surprised that she couldact in such a way.
Cao Cao faced and attackedhim, and Shen Pei was defeated and forced back.
All wept and said, "We would give our lives for it."
Tian Yu of Yuyang said to his Administrator Xianyu Fu, "Cao Caosupports the Son of Heaven and so commands the lords.
Liang Xing, a bandit from Fu, plundered [Zuo]pingyi. All thecounty officials were afraid: they moved their offices to the shelterof the commandery city, and many felt they should go somewhereeven more secure in order to escape him.
"Now above the emperor kills those ministers who give honest advice, and below he causes suffering and distress to the people. If this goes on much longer, it will be too late to repent."
At this time the Chancellor of Pengcheng, Xue Li, and the Chancellor of Xiapi, Zhai Rong of Danyang, had both sworn allegiance to Liu Yao. Xue Li held Moling city and Zhai Rong was camped in the south of that county. Sun Ce attacked them both and defeated them.
Guo Tai saw him and said, "You have high ability, surpassing other men and quite enough to gain you wealth and power.
In this year there was opened for the first time a market for the sale of offices at the Western Quarters. Each person appointed gave money in accordance with the position.For an office with salary and rank at Two Thousand shi, the fee was twenty million cash; for rank and salary at Four Hundred shi, the fee was four million cash. When a man particular virtue was appointed, he was assessed only half the amount, and some people paid only a third. A store house was established in the Western Garden to hold the proceeds.
The Excellency of Works Yu Fang left office.The former Grand Commandant Huang Qiong became Excellency of Works.
The eunuchs replied, "They plan harm for the nation."
They all replied, "If Commissioner Zuo had listened to you the first time and had sent soldiers to us, we might have maintained our allegiance. But now things have gone too far: we cannot surrender."
Cai Yong responded to the accusation, "Truly I am ignorant and foolish, and failed to pay attention to the misfortunes which might come as a consequence [of giving my advice]. Your majesty has not considered the honest words of a loyal servant. You should have maintained secrecy. Now that slanders have suddenly appeared, you have become doubtful and seek to put blame upon me.
Flying Swallow's personal name was Yan [meaning a swallow] and he was quick and agile and brave, so the men of his army called him Flying Swallow.
In the autumn, in the seventh month the Southern Shanyu Huchuquan came to attend the court of WEI. King Cao kept him at Ye and had the Worthy King of the West Qubei look after the state.
It was in this fashion that the WhiteDragon put on fish clothing and was troubled by Yu Ju,31 and theWhite Snake acted willfully and was brought to harm by Liu Ji.
Gan Ning asked to make an oblique approach against Yiling. He stormed the city and occupied it.
so that Yuan Shu became annoyed. Lü Bu felt uneasy, and he went to join Zhang Yang in Henei.
Li Tong kept a particular check on the tax which was due to bepaid in silk by each household. Zhao Yan the magistrate of Lang-ling went to him and said, "All the commanderies are in rebellionand only Yang'an remains obedient.
The message I carried was not flattering to you, and I fear you would not have been pleased to hear it. So I did not come forward.
When Liu Bei was in Jing province, he asked Sima Hui of Xiangyang about scholars.
Cao Cao wrote to Xun Yu, "When I come to Anzhong I amsure to defeat Zhang Xiu."
Your servant Sima Guang remarks:Shuxiang had the saying, "When a state is about to perish, there will be many new enactments."
In the summer, in the fourth month there was great drought. Seven provinces suffered from locusts.
The enemy will be marchingbackwards and forwards and his people will have no peace. Weshall not be tired, but they will be exhausted. In no more than threeyears success will come as you wait.
Lord Cao has plannedfor every possibility, but he cannot be certain Hedong will be safe.
When Zhu Jun attacked the Yellow Turbans his Major Protector of the Army, Fu Xie of Beidi, sent a memorial to say, "I have heard that the misfortunes of the empire come not from the outside but from within.
In the third month on the day bingyin [22 Apr] Li Jue had his nephew Li Xian take several thousand men and surround the palace, with three chariots to collect the emperor.
Thirty thousand, replied Zhou Yu.
The concubine Song of Liu Kui the King of Bohai was an aunt of the empress, and the Regular Attendant Wang Fu was afraid that the empress held resentment against him [for the misfortunes of Liu Kui]. He accused her of holding to the Way of the Left and of praying to the spirits. The emperor believed this and an order was issued that her seal and ribbon be withdrawn.
Zhang Xiu thanked him, but observed, "I didnot use your advice earlier, and this is the result. Now that I havebeen defeated, how can I go in chase again?"
The Regular Attendants Zhang Rang and Zhao Zhong encouragedthe emperor to make a levy of ten cash on every mou of cultivated land in the empire, and to use the money for the repair of the palace buildings and for the casting of bronze statues.
"The Regular Attendant Cao Jie and his associates are of mean origin, and are personally of poor moral quality. They slander and flatter and fawn upon their master, they are plausible and wicked in their search for favour. They commit the crimes of Zhao Gao, but have not yet received his punishment of being torn apart with chariots.
It was further ordered that cavalrymen of the Western Garden should travel among the provinces and commanderies [192] to hasten the transport. They disturbed the local administrations, and they too collected bribes.
In the third month on the day xinyou [23 Apr], first of the month, there was an eclipse of the sun.
When Duke Cao of WEI went to attack Zhang Lu, he sent an envelope of instructions to Xue Ti, Protector of the Army at Hefei, marked on the outside, "Should enemies approach, open this."
From this time on he seldom went to battle.
Hejian, however, is our own territory, and though it is good toannounce the defeat of Tian Yin and his fellow rebels, I amashamed there should ever have been need for such a campaign."
In the winter, in the tenth month on the day jiashen [30 Nov] Liu He, Chen Qiu, Liu Na and Yang Qiu were all sent to prison, where they died.
A mother may doubt her own true son, and three men can set a tiger in the market-place. Unless you are careful to test whether you are being deceived or told the truth, your loyal subjects will find themselves in the predicament of [Bo Qi at] Duyou.
Sun Ce was delighted, saying, "I have found you; we are together again!"Going forward to Hengjiang and Dangli[kou], they capturedboth places and drove Fan Neng and Zhang Ying away.
By this time the city of Chang'an city had been empty for more than forty days. Those who could had scattered, and starving people ate one another. For the next two or three years there was no trace of man within the passes.
but Gongsun Zan came up when they were only half across. The rebels were again defeated, the dead were several tens of thousands, and so much blood flowed that the water turned red. He captured more than seventy thousand alive, and it was impossible to count the quantity of armour and carriages and treasure. The fear of his name spread wide.
Liang Ji could make no reply to this, and Cui Qi was sent away.
Now thatthe empire is being set in order, you cannot execute them. If you do want to kill them, you should report first and ask for instructions."
When Hengjiang has fallen I shall go to my homeland to raise troops. I can bring thirty thousand men to help Your Honour the Commissioner settle the empire."
"Guo Yuan, moreover, is a headstrong fellow and accustomedto success. He will certainly take small account of our army. If hecrosses the Fen River to camp, and we attack him while he is part way across, then we can thoroughly defeat him."
but at that time no-one would agree with him, save only Xu Shu of Yingchuan.
"But supposing you leave Lu Bu now and go east [into Xu province]: if you leave any substantial number of men here you will have too few with you to accomplish anything; and if you leave only a small defence force behind then the people will keep to the cities - they will not be able to gather the harvest and Lu Bu will take advantage of their weakness to rob and plunder. The people would become more and more uncertain of their attachment to you. Juancheng, Fan and Wei [i.e.Puyang] would hold, but all the rest would be lost to us."In that case, you would no longer have Yan province,
Cao Song's baggage required more than a hundred carts. Tao Qian had stationed a garrison at Yinping, and the soldiers there were greedy for the treasure. They made a surprise attack on Cao Song between Hua and Fei and killed him, together with his younger son De.
Zhang Zhao spoke against Lu Su, saying that he was young andirresponsible. Sun Quan, however, showed him increasing honourand respect, and granted him supplies so that Lu Su became aswealthy as he had been before.
I suggest that your best plan now is to send a reliable friend tomake alliance with the Sun clan in the east, so you may act together in everything.
Liu Bei promoted the General of the Standard, Wei Yan of Yiyang,to become General Who Maintains Distant Lands in Peace, with command as Administrator of Hanzhong guarding the Han River.
Only a gentleman who is wise and understanding, with deep insight and capacity to plan far ahead, can appreciate the enormous advantages of Teaching and Custom, and the far-reaching effects their achievement may bring.
PC quoting Xiandi qjuzhu Jian'an 13: 208 AD 4 February 208 - 21 February 209
The roads [to Liang Ji's mansion] bore a steady stream of officials and commoners bearing gifts, whether to seek for some office or to ask pardon for a crime.
Those recommended as Filial and Incorrupt by senior officials should be gentlemen selected according to the highest standards. Recently, however, the imperial summons has been issued without sufficient care, and there has been occasion to reprimand the Three Excellencies on this account. Now, moreover, there is selection and accelerated promotion based upon skill in these minor literary forms. This opens the opportunity for private favouritism, and it ignores the prescriptions of all enlightened rulers. The hearts of the multitude cannot accept this system, but none dare voice an objection.
The importance of office in the provinces begins from this.
Guo Tu and Xin Pingagreed.
Sun Quan followed this suggestion, and appointed Lu Xun as Controller of the Division of the Right at Headquarters.
Surely this is still more true of the responsibilities of the empire, handed down by former rulers; yet you wish to neglect them in order to indulge your frivolous interests. Truly this demonstrates a lack of proper respect for your own dignity. How can you ignore the hard work of your predecessors? "A few years ago, when the Liang family had five marquises,36 they poisoned the whole empire. Heaven offered a plan to your sage intelligence, and you took them and destroyed them.
In the autumn, in the ninth month on the day gengyin, first of the month [26 Sep], there was an eclipse of the sun.
"In former times, Duan Jiong was a fine general leading trained men expert in war, but it still took him more than ten years to deal with the Western Qiang.
Shusun Wuji, the bandit of Taishan, attacked and killed the Commandant Hou Zhang.The General of the Gentlemen of the Household Zong Zi was sent to attack and destroy him.
Kong Rong said to Xun Yu, "Yuan Shao's lands are broad and histroops are strong. Tian Feng and Xu You are wise men to plan forhim, Shen Pei and Pang Ji are loyal ministers to act in his affairs,Yan Liang and Wen Chou are brave generals to command histroops. Here are serious problems."
Zhou Yu of Shu [county in Lujiang] was the same age as Sun Ce, and he too showed early promise and ability.
His followers, numberingmore than ten thousand, wanted to take Hua Xin the Administratorof Yuzhang as their leader.
Your majesty is loving and virtuous, generous and forgiving; you cannot bear to be too strict, so your eunuch servants usurp power and your loyal ministers are unable to come forward.
Before this, when the Dowager was established [as Empress in 165], Chen Fan had played a considerable role,
The army followed their master, and that was all. If we claim that they were wicked and rebellious, then pardon them, I am afraid they will just become more uncertain. That is not the way to settle them."
Zhao Qi fled these troubles, and wandered through many regions of the empire.He concealed his real name and never stayed long in the same place.He was selling cakes in the market-place at Beihai when Sun Hao of Anqiu saw him and noticed him.He took Zhao Qi home and cared for him, concealing him in the wall of his house.
On the day renwu [14 Sep] the Honoured Lady Liang [Meng] was established as Empress. The Yiling Tomb [of the late Empress Liang Nüying] was demoted to be the tomb of an Honoured Lady.
When Yu Jin arrived, he prepared his camp for defence beforehe went to call upon Cao Cao.
Though I receive imperial letters [with all respect], an army in the field may not be directed from the capital.I ask you to put an end to this debate and give me full authority to deal with matters on the spot, so that we may not lose our present advantage.
On one occasion Jiang Gong and his brother Jijiang were travelling to the commandery capital [of Pengcheng] and at night on the road they were captured by bandits.The bandits were going to kill them, but Jiang Gong said, "My brother is still young, the apple of his parents' eyes, and he is not yet betrothed. Please kill me and let him go."
Liu Bei always respected Zhuge Liang. He therefore applied no punishment, but he did dismiss Jiang Wan instantly from his post.
Sun Quan was in the utmost grief and pain, and three hundred families were set to maintain Lü Meng's tomb.
On the day gengzi [? wuxu: 6 Dec], last of the month, there was an eclipse of the sun.
Cao Cao attacked Yuan Shu's army, defeated it, then besieged Fengqiu.
"The former Grand Commandant Duan Jiong was one of the finest military heroes of the age, with long experience of affairs on the frontier. He served in the wars from the time he was a child with hanging locks, and his achievement reached its culmination when his hair was white with age. He served two emperors [yourself and Emperor Huan your predecessor] one after the other, his glory and merit were unique in splendour,
So the Han has a number of different ways of obtaining men to serve.
the soldiers were terrified, and each sought to flee for his own safety.
Then Yan province wassettled, and Xu Xi and Mao Hui fled to Zang Ba.
"If only your majesty would open the way for criticism to reach you, and pay good attention to all the precedents of the past. Put away the specious talkers from your presence, and abandon the music of Zheng and Wey.27 Then your government will reach a peak of peace and harmony, and your virtues will attract the influence of a benevolent wind."
Jian Shi, who was in the palace at that time, intended to kill He Jin and set Liu Xie upon the throne. He invited He Jin to come and consult with him, and He Jin immediately mounted his chariot to go to the palace.
"In the face of death I express these feelings. My heart's blood flows in tears as I write." When the emperor saw this letter he was yet more angry than before. Kou Rong was executed.
Liu Bei sent Li Hui, an Investigator of Jianning, to talk with Ma Chao. So Ma Chao escaped from Wudu into the territory of the Di barbarians, then wrote in private to Liu Bei, asking to surrender to him.
Cai Yong sent in a memorial on this matter: "Now if we consider the two territories of You and Ji in ancient times, they are regions which produce armour and horses. In recent years, however, they have suffered war and famine, and have gradually been reduced to poverty and exhaustion.
He was extremely good at reforming by teaching.A man in Wang Lie's village stole some cattle, but when the owner caught him the robber confessed, saying, "I would ratheraccept the punishment of death, just so long as you do not tell Wang Yanfang."
He rejects the grace and loyalty between master and servant, and he holds unreasonable resentment for the fate of a dead friend. I do not believe I can tolerate such behaviour."
Jin Yun wept and said, "I do not dare to have a double heart [and act unfaithfully]."
Zhuge Liang, Zhang Fei and Zhao Yun came in with their troops to join him.
The Administrator of Jianwei, Ren Qi, and the Colonel Jia Long raised troops against him, but Liu Yan attacked and killed both of them.
When the rebels hear your powerful army is approaching, they will unite against you. Men from the border country are excellent fighters, and it will be hard to match their attacks. In contrast, our men have been called up only recently, and the officers and soldiers are not used to one another. If some trouble should appear within our ranks it will be too late for regrets.
Zhuge Liang was assistant to Liu Bei in the government of SHU. His rule was stem, and many of the people resented it.
And there were manyrefugees, who came or wandered away wherever they thought theywould find good government and peace, and who had no sense ofloyalty to any ruler. Zhang Zhao, Zhou Yu and the others nonetheless believed thatwith their help Sun Quan could maintain the state. They gave himtheir allegiance and served him.
As Dong Zhuo came to the Park of Illustrious Light, he saw fires rising in the distance. Realising there was a revolt, he led his troops quickly forward and reached the west of the city before dawn.Hearing that the emperor was in the north, he went with the excellencies and ministers to receive him below the Beimang Slope.
Shen Zhong, a Gentleman of the Palace from Liang, sent in a letter saying, "When your majesty first came to the throne, you could not take full control of affairs. The dowager gave all her attention to nurture and care for you, and took temporary control as regent. It was under those circumstances that the Regular Attendants Su Kang and Guan Ba received their due punishments,
In the twelfth month the Grand Commandant Huangfu Song was dismissed. The Household Counsellor Zhou Zhong was made Grand Commandant and shared control of the Secretariat.
Soon, when the empire is settled, each man will be able to go back to his native place and plough his own soil, and that is the way things should be.
The Yellow Turbans of Runan defeated the Administrator Zhao Qian at Shaoling.
In the summer, in the fourth month the Supervisor of InternunciosPei Mou was sent with imperial orders for all the leaders within thepasses,
The Administrator of Nanyang is Cen Gongxiao, Cheng Jin of Hongnong has only to sit and sing.
In his judgment of men, Sima Hui was sensitive and clear as a mirror.
Yi province has borders difficult to attack, a thousand li of fertile land, and soil which is the treasury of Heaven. Liu Zhang is dull and weak, and Zhang Lu controls the north. They have many people and a prosperous country, yet they show no sympathy for their subjects. All the wise and able men will be dreaming of a benevolent ruler.
Yuan Shu fled into Jiujiang.
Huangfu Gui, the General on the Liao, who was himself a man of great family in the western provinces, felt ashamed not to be numbered with them. So he sent in a letter, "I once recommended the former Minister of Finance Zhang Huan;
In his own village, Chen Shi dealt with every problem calmly and equitably. If there was some dispute, people would always come to ask his judgment, he would explain who was right and who was wrong, and no-one ever went away dissatisfied with his decision. People would sigh and say, "It is better to be punished by the law than have Master Chen despise you."
Cao Cao sent his officers Yue Jin andLi Dian to attack him. Zhang Cheng of Henei had ten thousand men under arms and wasplundering between the Xiao [Hills] and Mian[chi]. Zhang Yan ofHongnong raised troops to join him.
Before the documents in the case had been sorted out, there was an amnesty of pardon. Zhang Pan, however, was not prepared to leave the prison, and sat there in his cangue and his fetters.
In the autumn the Yellow River broke its banks in Jincheng and flooded over twenty.
So Zhang Xian arrested Su Buwei and over sixty other people from his household, and he killed them all.
They held my carriage and would not let me leave.
"Yuan Shao is strong, and if we offer support with our smallforce he will certainly not treat us with respect. Cao Cao is weak, soif he gets us he will certainly be pleased; that is a second reason.
"Furthermore, though Dong Zhuo was a villain, proud and overbearing, with no restraint or limit to his ambition, even he dared not [claim the throne].
In the eleventh month Wang Guo besieged Chencang.
On the other hand, if you surrender to Cao Cao, where would you go?
The empire is in disorder," replied He Jin, "and it is all your fault.
"Yuan Shao's officers struggle for influence, with accusa tions, confusion and uncertainty. You treat subordinates fairlyand you pay no attention to rumour or slander. This is superiorunderstanding.
Let me calculate things for you. The north is not yet settled. Ma Chao and Han Sui are still in the west of the passes, and they are a danger to Cao Cao's rear. At the same time, Cao Cao is leaving his saddled horses, and is taking boats and oars to contend with Wu and Yue. Furthermore, it is now the depths of winter, so his horses will have no fodder. He is forcing an army from central China on long marches to the region of the Yangzi and the lakes. His men have no experience of the marsh country and they will certainly get sickness.
At one time he had asked to marry the daughter of Li Gao, former Administrator of Runan, but he was refused. So he led his officers and soldiers to Li Gao's house, kidnapped the girl, then shot and killed her for the fun of it.
At this time an edict sent the messenger Duan Xun to grant Liu Yu a larger fief, with command over six provinces. Gongsun Zan was made General of the Van and Marquis of Yi.
"Candidate," said Zhang Zhao, "is this a time for weeping?" Hehad Sun Quan put off his mourning clothes, helped him mount ahorse, and sent him out to inspect the army.
"I have been a Gentleman for fifteen years, and have seen and heard for myself all that Zhu Yu has done; it is indeed more than August Heaven can pardon.
Ni Heng said to Kong Rong, 'Zhongni [Confucius] is not dead!' and Kong Rong replied, 'Yan Hui lives again!' This is Great Refractoriness and Impiety, to be punished with the utmost rigour."
He cut off the head of Yuan Shao's messenger and sent the sealand ribbon which he had been offered to Cao Cao.
So the south willwant to fight early, while delay gives advantage to the north.
"I plan to share it with you," replied Li Du, "and your honour may take half the credit."
Then Yang Feng and his associates attacked Duan Wei's camp without the authority, but after ten days they had not captured it.
Sun Quan wrote to King Cao of WEI, requesting permission to attack Guan Yu with his own forces, but asking he keep it secret so that Guan Yu would have no opportunity to prepare against him.
A great man stands firm against misfortune," exclaimed Cui Lin. "How can one respect people like you?"
Moreover, the people of this commandery have held loyal, and evenin time of danger they have never been uncertain. I believe the stateshould be showing some consideration, but we still impose the silktax. What sort of encouragement is that?"
He was afraid that the Consultant Bing Zun, who was husband to Meng's elder sister, might persuade Xuan [his mother-in-law] to turn the proposal down, so he sent some of his retainers and they killed Bing Zun.
and Cao Cao sent Xiahou Dun, Yu Jin and other generals to opposehim.
Meng Tuo gave a share of these to Zhang Rang, and Zhang Rang was extremely pleased.As a result of this, Meng Tuo was appointed Inspector of Liang province.
"I did not leave my native country and come to join you because of my family's position, but because I want to help in the work of the world.
and Chen Gui realised that he would himself be harmed by Liang Ji. He refused food for seven days, and so he died.
Du Xi, Zhao Yan and Po Qin, men of Yingchuan, had taken refugefrom the troubles and come to Jing province. Liu Biao treated allthree as his guests.
As Yuan Shang's force approached, Cao Cao's officers said, "This isan army coming home, and they will be fighting for themselves.Best keep away from them."
The Master of Writing Zhu Mu memorialised, "In this matter of army supplies, Feng Gun is unduly concerned to clear himself of suspicion. This is not the way that a high officer should behave."An edict was issued that the criticism [of Feng Gun] be considered no further.
Then Liu Yao went west up the Yangzi to Pengze, and sent Zhai Rong to help Zhu Hao attack Zhuge Xuan.
That territory is flourishing and content, witha unified government.
Before this, the Grand Commandant Yuan Tang had three sons, Yuan Cheng, Yuan Feng and Yuan Wei.
In the event, Guan Yu set the Administrator of Nan commandery, Mi Fang, to guard Jiangling and the General [Fu] Shi Ren to guard Gongan while he himself led an army to attack Cao Ren at Fan.
When Dong Zhuo received the summons [from He Jin] he set out at once, sending in another memorial, "The Regular Attendant Zhang Rang and his fellows have usurped favour and played for advantage. They have corrupted and disrupted all within the seas.
For these reasons, serving the majesty of Great Han, I have set up a plan for the long term. I intend to cut the problem out by the roots, so it will never grow again.
When Cao Cao's force arrived they surrounded the enemy campand raised a great fire, and those inside were startled and confused.
Yang Fu fought Ma Chao. He was wounded five times, but theenemy were defeated.
The eunuchs had long resented the Dou family. So they took the dowager's body in a clothing cart to the market-place in the south of the city and left it in a shed there for several days.Cao Jie and Wang Fu wanted to have the funeral ceremonies carried out with rituals suitable for an Honoured Lady.
all with flags of the Yuan army. Gagging themen and tying the horses' mouths, they went out by night andmoved along side-paths between the roads. The men carried boundfirewood. If anyone questioned them, they explained that, "LordYuan is afraid Cao Cao may attack his afterguard, so he is sending reinforcements to the defence."
Lu Su wanted to talk with Guan Yu. His officers suspected a trick, and advised him not to go,
Cui Lie submitted five million cash through a nurse, and only then was he made Excellency over the Masses.
Startled and frightened, Zhang Xiu said, "There was no call togo so far as that!"
Zhao Wei besieged Liu Zhang in Chengdu.
They spread the story that "The azure sky is dead, and a Yellow Heaven will take its place. When the year is jiazi great fortune will come to the world."*
ou, my general, must act at once to remove evil from the empire, and leave a name for later generations. You cannot let this opportunity slip."
At this time advisers wanted to distribute the famous estates about Chengdu among Liu Bei's officers,
Zhu Zhi the Commandant of Danyang drove away Xu Gong the Administrator of Wu commandery, and took over his territory. Xu Gong went south to take refuge with White Tiger Yan, the bandit of the hills.
As King Cao of WEI was returning from Hanzhong, he had sent the General Who Pacifies Criminals Xu Huang to camp at Wan city in support of Cao Ren.After Yu Jin and the others had been destroyed, Xu Huang came forward to the Yangling Slope.
Zhang Liao led a few dozen body-guards and set himself in the middle of the camp. Soon everything was settled, then they caught the ringleaders and killed them.
Lü Bu fought them within the walls but could do nothing to stop them. Leading a few hundred horsemen, and with the head of Dong Zhuo tied to his saddle, he fled the city.Halting his horse below the Gate Engraved in Blue, he called Wang Yun to come away with him.
Tian Chou went back north to Wuzhong, where he gathered together several hundred of his clanspeople and others that came to him. They cleared the ground and made covenant together, "Unless our lord's enemy suffers vengeance we can remain no longer in the world."
If you send him against Zhang Lu, Zhang Lu will certainlybe defeated.
On various pretexts, he killed Wang Xian and Li Quan and a dozen others, the strongest and most influential men of the province, and so established a punitive authority.
Chen Fan wrote to refuse the honour, "I have heard that enfeoffment with a territory is the reward of good work and virtue.
Zhang Ji's younger kinsman the General Who Establishes LoyaltyZhang Xiu took over command and came to camp at Wan.
When all that is eaten, it may be time to review the affairs of the world."
She wasquick-witted and brave, with spirit equal to her brothers. She hadmore than a hundred serving-maids, and they all carried swords inattendance.
Yuan Shao has an army which is isolated, dependent and poor; he relies on us for everything. Like a child on the lap, if you end its suckling it will starve and die. Why do you want to give him the province?"
Liu Bei passed Liu Biao's grave and took his leave of him; he wept and went away.
His Officer ofMerit Yan Pu of Baxi objected, "The Han valley contains morethan a hundred thousand households. The people are prosperous, thesoil is rich, and on all four sides we have strong barriers againstattack.
Because she was pregnant, the emperor had interceded several times with Cao Cao on her behalf but without success.
Xin Pi told his daughter Xianying, and she sighed, "The Heir isthe one who must take the place of the lord and master at the ceremonies in the ancestral temple and at the sacrifices on the national altars to the gods of soil and grain.
Gao Rou, a Junior Clerk in the Department of Granaries,objected, "If a major force goes west, Han Sui and Ma Chao willsuspect we intend to attack them, and they will join together todefend themselves.
The daughter of Bing Yuan, a Senior Clerk in the office of the Excellency of Works, had also died young, and Cao Cao asked that she might be buried with Cangshu.Bing Yuan refused, saying, "The marriage of dead children is quite improper.
He took office with policies that were broadly based and well prepared, and all the troubles were settled.
He enfeoffed Quan Zong as Marquis of Yanghua Village.
Cao Cao appointed Liang Xi of Chen commandery as Senior Major and Inspector of Bing province.
Huang Zu managed to escape, buthis family was captured, and six thousand ships, while tens ofthousands of his men were killed or drowned.
The Libationers of the Palace Attendants Yue Song and Jia Hu brought in a great number of worthless sycophants, who took delight in petty village gossip. The emperor was extremely pleased with them, he treated them [138] with quite inappropriate favour, and he continually neglected his formal duties.
When Liu Yu received the letter he sent several thousand horsemen to aid Liu He.
At this time the carriages and outriders for the excellencies and ministers and the imperial concubines and their relatives were numbered in the tens of thousands, and the expenses and labour that was levied were beyond calculation.
Then Lü Meng got better. An amnesty was given to celebrate the improvement, and all Sun Quan's ministers sent congratulations. In the end, however, he died, at the age of forty-two.
The general has made his decision," replied Li Xian.
I cannot compare with him, replied Han Fu.
An amnesty was proclaimed,25 but Cheng Jin executed Zhang Fan regardless, and he also arrested and killed more than two hundred of Zhang Fan's clansmen and followers.26 He then reported his actions to the throne.
He lived in this seclusion for eighteen years, and he died in the earthen house.
In the eleventh month Zhang Yang's officer Yang Chou killedZhang Yang and went over to Cao Cao.
but Zhuge Liang pleaded on his behalf "Jiang Wan is not a petty admini strator, but he is a true servant of the state.
Cao Cao sent the Chief Clerk to the Minister ofWorks Liu Dai of Pei state and the General of the Household WangZhong of [You]fufeng to attack him, but they had no success.
while all the troops, morethan three thousand men, were placed under Fan Xian's command.
Zheng Bao, bandit leader of Yang province, planned to force thepeople living there to go to the south of the Yangzi. Because Liu Yeof Huainan was a well-known man from a [261] leading family hewanted to force him to set an example. Liu Ye was worried.
Bo Cai besieged Huangfu Song at Changshe.
When he came to the execution ground he swore at theman with the axe and demanded to be allowed to face north, saying,"My master is out there."
He divided his territory into three regions. The Eastern Division ran from Youbeiping east to Liaodong, linking with the Fuyu, the Hui and Mo, and containing more than twenty subordinate groups. The Central Division extended from Youbeiping westwards to Shanggu, and contained more than ten groups. The Western Division extended west from Shanggu as far as Dunhuang and the Wusun, with more than twenty groups.
Cao Cao felt that Kong Rong was beginning to go too far, and he disliked him still more.
Dong Zhuo clapped his hands and said to the Palace Assistant Imperial Clerk Huangfu Song, "Yizhen, are you afraid?"
So Lu Bu's cavalry let Cao Cao go and chased the man on the bay.
Now, however, all communications were cut off and grain transport could not get through.Liu Yu wore old clothes and rope sandals, ate only the simplest meals, and held it essential to maintain a lenient administration. He encouraged the farming of mulberries, he opened a prosperous trade at a market with the barbarians of Shanggu, and brought in the surplus salt and iron from Yuyang. 42 The people enjoyed the harvest, a shi [53] of grain was thirty cash, 43 and more than a million gentry and commoners of Qing and Xu provinces fled the troubles and came to Liu Yu. He took them in and cared for them with sympathy, settled them and set them in a livelihood. All the refugees forgot that they were exiles.
and sought to extend punishment even against those who are dead. They would hack the trees from our family tomb-mound, and they cause your august court to raise false accusations.
In a very short time there was smoke and flame stretched across the sky, and a whole multitude of men and horses were burned or drowned and died.
In the winter Cao Cao built the Bronze Bird Terrace at Ye.
Zhang Wen sent Zhou Shen to pursue the rebels with thirty thousand men.
Later when he returned and saw Zhang Miao, they wept for emotion.
Then Guo Tai said to him, "At first I could see only your outward appearance; now, however, I appreciate your true nature."So he took Wei Zhao as his friend, and treated him with the utmost affection.
Sun Quan gave a feast aboard one of his warships. He Qi got down from his mat and wept and said, "Your honour is a ruler of men. You should always be heavily guarded. In today's affair, when you almost came to misfortune,
Back in camp, however, Huang Zu treated Gan Ning no better than before.
Some time later, when Cao Zhi became estranged from his father because of his arrogant and wilful behaviour, he relied increasingly upon Yang Xiu, and Yang Xiu dared not let him down.
Trodden down by men and horses, they sank into the mud and a whole mass of them died together.
Far better close your borders and waituntil the situation becomes clearer."
The barbarians of Changsha rebelled, camping at Yiyang.The barbarians of Lingling raided Changsha.
At present, with authority to make appointments and sufficientpower to maintain your independence, you have no need for a royaltitle.
Liu Yan was a descendant of the Respectful King of Lu, and Liu Yu was a grandson in the fifth generation from the Respectful King of Donghai.
Guo Si wanted to have the emperor go to Gaoling, but the chief ministers and Zhang Ji thought he should go to Hongnong. A great meeting was held, but nothing was decided.
Xing Yong, Senior Clerk in the Department of the East, said, "To replace the senior lineage with a junior branch is something that men of ancient times avoided. I beg your majesty to think again."
When acupuncture was applied, Sun Quan was miserable for him.
and Lii Meng recommended that Gan Ning command the assault force. With a grapnel-rope of silk in his hands, Gan Ning climbed the walls and was first into the city. Beat ing the drum himself Lii Meng followed close with well-trained men. All the soldiers leaped to the fray.
In the autumn, in the seventh month, the Excellency of Works Liu Yi left office. The Minister of the Guards Chen Qiu became Excellency of Works.
In the winter, in the tenth month, Huangfu Song fought with Zhang Jue's younger brother Zhang Liang at Guangzong. Zhang Liang's forces were well-trained and courageous, and Huangfu Song could make no headway.
I ask to go forward with the General WhoDisplays Majesty [Sun Yu], to seize Shu and then take over ZhangLu. I shall leave the General Who Displays Majesty to hold thatterritory in alliance with Ma Chao, and come back to join you.
Xun You said, "This is a trapfor the enemy, how can we leave?" Cao Cao looked at him andsmiled.
first they took Li Jue's nominees, then Guo Si's, then Fan Chou's. No-one recommended by the excellencies ever gained a place.
"When your majesty first came to the throne, your first priority was to read through the classics. Only in the spare time from that occupation would you concern yourself with other writings, and they were no more than a past-time, an alternative to the Boyi game. They can never serve as the basis for education and selection to official position.
and those that crossed with him were the Empress, and Yang Biao, and a few dozen others. All the palace women, officials and people that could not get across were robbed by the soldiers: their clothing was taken and even their hair was cut off. More people died from the cold than could be counted.
Dong Zhuo himself came out to fight with him amongst the tombs, but he was defeated and fled.
If Liu Bei joins Liu Biao's sons, and if they can set things in order, then we should keep peace with them and make alliance of friendship. If, on the other hand, they continue to disagree, we should make other plans to achieve the great design.
Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu had an army of twenty or thirty thousand men, but the river held them away from Cao Ren and they could not attack.
The Officer of Merit Zhang Chang sent a letter of protest [to Wang Chang], "Men such as Wen Weng, Shaofu and Zhuo Mao all based their administration on gentleness and generosity, and their memory has come down to later ages.
When Zuo Feng returned to the capital he said to the emperor, "It would be easy to destroy the rebels in Guangzong, but General Lu allows his army to rest behind strong defences, and simply hopes that some punishment from Heaven will befall the rebels."
Ma Chao and his fellows attacked the camp indarkness, but soldiers from ambush caught them by surprise anddefeated them.
The supplies of grain were soon exhausted, however, and all the attendants were [reduced to] eating vegetables and fruit.
An imperial edict was sent to Yuan Shao, scolding him because,"Though your lands are broad and you have many soldiers, youhave set up a party solely for yourself. We do not hear of you as aleader to give help to the true king, we only hear that you usurpauthority and attack others."
When he at last heard something, he sent one of his close attendants to ask Liu Zong what was going on, and Liu Zong sent his official Song Zhong to tell him the news.
"Since the time I suffered accusation, three amnesties have been issued and two opportunities for redemption.50 No evidence [has been presented] to support the charges, and this alone should justify some remission.
The Minister of the Household Chen Fan sent in a written remonstrance: "Even in times of peace and security, it is appropriate to maintain restraint in travelling and the chase. How much more strongly should this apply in times such as the present, when wesuffer from the three forms of emptiness.
Hebowed to Hua Xin and treated him with the utmost courtesy.
Tang Xuan, elder brother of Tang Heng, who was Intendant of Jingzhao, had an old quarrel with Zhao Qi.He arrested the family and dependents of Zhao Qi and several more distant members of his clan, charged them with the utmost severity of the law, and killed every one of them.
Wei Zhao prepared another dish and brought it in again, but Guo Tai still abused him.
Yang Qiao was a man of graceful carriage and great elegance. He sent in a number of comments about questions of government. The emperor was delighted by his talents and good looks, and he wanted to marry Yang Qiao to a princess.Yang Qiao refused very firmly, however, and would not hear of the proposal. Then he went on a hunger strike, and after seven days he died.
In the time of the Fortunate Empress-Dowager, a woman held control of the government.She had no direct contact with the excellencies and ministers, and for that reason eunuchs were appointed as Regular Attendants and Junior Attendants of the Yellow Gates, to communicate between the inner and outer palaces.
Before this, when Zhang Huan and Duan Jiong were dealing with the Qiang, they had been in disagreement. Now that Duan Jiong was Director of Retainers, he planned to injure Zhang Huan by having him expelled, sent back to Dunhuang, and held there.Zhang Huan,however, sent Duan Jiong a piteous letter of request, and Duan Jiong let the matter rest.
Someone said to Zhuge Liang, "Fa Zheng is too aggressive. You should tell our lord to restrain him."
Yuan Shao ordered those military officers at Luoyang who were expert in strategy to investigate the eunuchs, and he encouraged Dong Zhuo and the other commanders to send in memorials post-haste, asking permission to bring their troops forward to the Lodge of Tranquil Joy.
Slave, snarled Pang De, "what is this talk of surrender?
Dong Zhuo also appointed the Master of Writing Han Fu as Governor of Ji province, the Palace Attendant Liu Dai as Inspector of Yen, and Kong Zhou of Chenliu as Inspector of Yu. Zhang Miao of Dongping became Administrator of Chenliu, and Zhang Zi of Yingchuan was Administrator of Nanyang.
Tian Chou was angry because the Wuhuan had killed many of the leaders of his commandery, but though he wanted to attack them he did not have enough men.
Yuan Shu retreated first to Xiangyi and then to Ningling.
Yuan Shao sent messengers to call on Zhang Xiu, and he also wroteto Jia Xu to suggest an alliance.
When Fu Xie attacked the Yellow Turbans he gained great success, and it was felt that he deserved enfeoffment. Zhao Zhong, however, made false accusations against him.
and Yuan Shu was very angry. He ordered Sun Ce to attack Lu Kang and said to him, "I was confused that other time and appointed Chen Ji. I have been annoyed with myself ever since.
Yuan Shao was truly fond of Zang Hong. He had hoped to compel his submission and then forgive him. Seeing, however, that Zang Hong meant what he said, he realised he would never serve him. So he killed him.
On the day yichou [28 Aug] the Gentle and Generous Empress was buried at Yiling.
"War is bad," continued Liu Zihui, "and you should not be the first to begin it.
They then turned against Lingling, but the Administrator Chen Qiu of Xiapi maintained a firm defence against them.
but Cao Cao refused, "Mengzhuo [Zhang Miao] is a close friend. Right or wrong, we should show him tolerance.
but Sun Quan replied, "I am not askingyou to plough through the classics like some academic scholar. Justbrowse a little, to get some idea what happened in the past.
When YuanShao attacked Gongsun Zan, Tadun brought the Wuhuan to helphim,
Cao Cao was furious, and the Prefect of [the Majors in Charge of] Official Carriages was put to death.
At this, Dou Wu and Chen Fan appointed Zhu Yu as Director of Retainers, Liu You as Intendant of Henan and Yu Qi as the Prefect of Luoyang.
Yuan Shao now brought a great army against Gongsun Zan.
There was famine in Sili and in Yu province. Four or five out of every ten of the people died, so many that whole families were wiped out.
While Cao Cao was on campaign in the west, a rebellion by TianYin and Su Bo of Hejian troubled You and Ji provinces. TheGeneral of the Household for All Purposes Cao Pi wanted to go inperson to attack them,
"Tan is the eldest, and should be your successor, but you aresending him away. Trouble will come from this." "I want each of my sons to govern a province,"
Now you want to destroy us and our families, this is surely too much!"
In the summer, in the fifth month an edict granted King Cao of WEI the banners and flags of the Son of Heaven. When he went out or in the road should be cleared of all other traffic.
Your excellency, you are a great official of the state, with cities under your government for the distance of a thousand li.If you raise your banner and sound the war-drum, a hundred thousand men will respond to your call.How can you abandon the responsibilities of your insignia and your office, and become a fugitive?"
In the second month, on the day dingchou [25 Mar] Dong Zhuo was appointed Grand Master, with rank above the kings.
being Chapter 47 of the Chronicle of Han
"Lord Cao's camp is strong," argued Zhang He. "If we attack itwe shall certainly not succeed.
Sun Quan promoted Shi Xie to become General of the Left, andShi Xie sent his son as hostage.
How can he now restrict and confine Xiaozhi, denying him the few things he
It is with the utmost loyalty that I seek the destruction of Dong Zhuo, I refuse to think of anything else!
The matter was referred for debate to officials of the Four Offices and scholars of the Imperial University competent to discuss the issue.
As Jia Biao went out on a tour of investigation, his clerks wanted him to go to the south, but Jia Biao said angrily, "It is quite in the nature of things that bandits should harm people; but for a mother to turn against her child, that is defiance of Heaven and against the right Way." So he travelled to the north, made judgement of that crime, and punished the mother.
Soon afterwards, Li Jue invited Guo Si again, and they both got very drunk. Guo Si thought that he had been poisoned, so he made an emetic of liquid excrement and drank it.
The empire is now in fragments, replied Liu Bei, "and warfare renews itself every day.One opportunity may have gone, but why should it not come again? Seize the occasion next time, and you will have no cause for regret."
"I am not equal to Wang of Kuaiji," replied Hua Xin.
Yuan Shao and Lü Bu attacked him together, and the fighting continued for more than ten days. Many of Zhang Yan's troops were killed or wounded, but Yuan Shao's army was also exhausted, and both sides drew back.
Li Jue and Guo Si were angry that the emperor had gone towards the east. When they heard Yang Ding was attacking Duan Wei they came to join him, intending to force the emperor back to the west.
5: 182 AD
Cao Zhang attacked the Wuhuan of Dai commandery, taking part in the fighting himself. His armour was hit by several arrows but his spirit was undaunted. He followed up his victory, and pursued the rebels to the north of Sanggan. He thoroughly defeated them, and the men whose heads he took and the people he captured were numbered by the thousands.
If he agrees, the empire can be settled.
If you extend your generosity to these men, you will be following the will of Heaven."
Cao Cao besieged Yongqiu. Zhang Miao went to Yuan Shu to ask help [for his brother Zhang Chao in that city] but on the way he was killed by his own men.
but you set forth a grand strategy. That is just what I looked for."
Then he shifted his administration to Xiangyang, kept the commanderies and counties in order and looked after them, and all the lands south of the Yangzi were settled.
In the third month the Chendi Qiang raided Zhangye and Jiuquan.
Everyone was suspicious and uneasy, and Xun Yu realised that Zhang Miao planned to rebel. He immediately ordered his men to prepare themselves, and sent an urgent message to call Xiahou Dun, the Administrator of Dong commandery, from Puyang. As Xiahou Dun left, Lu Bu occupied the city.
In the winter, in thetenth month Cao Cao turned against him, Yang Feng fled south toYuan Shu, and Cao Cao captured his camp at Liang.
In Shanyin county there were five or six old and venerable men who came down from the hill country of Ruye,each bringing a hundred cash as a farewell gift for Liu Chong.They said to him, "Simple people from the hills such as we know nothing of the government of a commandery. When other administrators were here, however, officials came all the time to demand things from us: even at night they wouldnot stop, the dogs were constantly barking and our people had no peace.
The Excellency over the Masses Yang Ci protested, "The system of the former emperors waIn this year there were constructed the Jade Sceptre Park for Bird Netting and the Park of Spiritual Jade.that on the left they opened up the Vast Pond and on the right they constructed the Shanglin Park. They were neither extravagant nor parsimonious, and so they achieved the proper balance required by ceremony.
Sun Quan attacked two camps of hills bandits at Mo and Bao and pacified them.
Heaven has put YuanShang into your hands. "Suppose, however, that you neglect the opportunity and attackJing province instead?
The barbarians of Yizhou commandery rebelled. The Administrator Li Yong attacked and pacified them.
"The Yi zhuan of Jing Fang says, 'When the Yellow River runs clear, the empire will have peace.'
"Feng Gun previously defeated the barbarians of Jing province, and his merit is comparable to that of [Yin] Jifu.
Sun Quan laughed aloud. He sent Pan Jun with five thousand men, and they cut off heads and pacified Wuling.
Now we have a young ruler who is feeble and weak, in the power of an evil minister. These are not the faults for which [the King of] Changyi [Liu He] forfeited his imperial throne.2If we make a sudden change, who in the empire can be at ease?
So he dissuaded Liang Gu from his plan, saying, "If you keep a hawk on a string and feed it, it can catch birds for you,
As the emperor arrived, Li Jue had all the gold and silk of the imperial treasury transferred to his own camp, and he set fire to the palaces and apartments, the offices and the people's houses. Everything was destroyed.
In the winter, in the eleventh month Cao Cao made another attackon Zhang Xiu. He stormed Huyang, taking prisoner Liu Biao'sofficer Deng Ji,
When Ziming [Lü Meng] was young,I used to say that he was not the man to hesitate, no matter whether a task might prove difficult or easy.
On one occasion someone reported Liu Bei was dead. As otherministers offered congratulations, Yuan Huan was the only one torefrain.
The people of their country made up a song about them: A model for the empire, Fang Bowu; Grasping appointment from his teaching, Zhou Zhongjin.
Han Fan, magistrate of Yiyang, and Liang Qi the magistrate ofShe, both surrendered with their counties.
Cheng Huang was frightened, and he told Cao Jie of Chen Qiu's plan.Then Cao Jie and his associates told the emperor about it, and said, "Liu He is in written communication with Liu Na, Chen Qiu and Yang Qiu. They are planning treason."
If Your Honour goes to attack him now, his defeat is assured.
As He Xun came to Ji, he scolded Bian Zhang and his followers for their mutiny and their rebellion.
"Qingzhou [Yuan Tan] is emotional and hasty, and he confusesright and wrong.
It is difficult to judge good fortune and ill, replied Song Yi, "but the first principle must be to obey an imperial command."
As the inspectors and administrators also took personal commissions, the people groaned under the burden.
All his files and documents had to be hauled up to him,
Du Mi later left office and returned to his own home, but he called frequently upon the [local] administrators and magistrates, and he often made recommendations and proposals.
51 of the Chronicle of Han
The edict in reply said: "Since the very beginning of our reign,Juche'er has been loyal and obedient, and according to the principles of Chunqiu we should show special consideration to him [as a ruler who shared our first year]."What crime has he committed that might warrant his disgrace?
Dou Wu and Dou Shao fled, and the whole army chased them and surrounded them. They both committed suicide, and their heads were displayed at the Capital Watch-House of Luoyang. Dou Wu's kinsmen, clients and relatives by marriage were arrested and executed, while the Palace Attendant Liu Yu and the Colonel of the Garrison Cavalry Feng Shu were also killed, with all their clans.
The remainder of his men cried out, however, "Does our general abandon us?"
As a result of this new defeat of Li Jue and his fellows, Dong Cheng and the others thought to continue their journey.
In the fifth month the Excellency of Works Xu Xiang became Excellency over the Masses and the Minister of the Imperial Household Ding Gong of Pei kingdom became Excellency of Works.
Cao Cao wanted Zhang Hong to persuade Sun Quan into a closealliance. He appointed him Commandant of the Eastern Region ofKuaiji,
Yuan Shu sent secret messengers to give seals to the clan leaders ofDanyang, Zu Lang and others, that they should rouse the Shanyueand make a joint attack on Sun Ce.
In the summer, in the fourth month on the day bingchen [11 May], there was an earthquake.
Then the body of Wang Fu was exposed at the Xia Gate of the city,11 with a large placard which read, "The traitor minister Wang Fu."
Yuan Shao repeated Geng Bao's suggestion to his officers incouncil,
Lü Bu approved this, and he planned to have Chen Gong andGao Shun hold the city while he led cavalry to cut Cao Cao's linesof supply.
Sun Jian went on to Luyang to join Yuan Shu,
Since Qian Zhao had held command of the Wuhuan for the Yuanfamily, Cao Cao now sent him to Liucheng to keep the barbariansunder control.
In the autumn, in the ninth month Gao Shun and his associatescaptured Pei city and took Liu Bei's wife and children. Liu Bei fledalone.
Before this, several of the emperor's children had died young. When the Empress He gave birth to a son Liu Bian, he was brought up at the house of a Taoist named Shi Zimiao, and he was called Lord Shi.
Sun Quan took the point. He thanked Lü Meng and said, "I give you full command, and I shall have Sun Jiao support you from the rear."
Yang Fu wept and cried inprotest, "We brought our fathers and elder brothers here, our sonsand younger brothers, urging them to fight for glory. We can onlydie for the cause. We have a duty to hold this city.
"That is not what I meant, "replied Zheng Tai. "I do not believe, however, that there is any need to send a large army against the east of the mountains.
The memorial came before the throne, and the emperor called a temporary halt to the collection of money for the palace building fund.
I was born and brought up in Bin and Qi,18 and I am now fifty-nine years old. In former times, when I was a junior officer in my home commandery, and there were several instances of rebellion by the Qiang, Iwas able to predict events with a fair degree of accuracy.
When the conference began, there were several hundred people in attendance, but each looked at the other to speak first, and for a long time there was no-one who dared commence the debate.
but as he reached the top of a slope he saw a weakness in the enemy lines and loosed his soldiers to the attack. Zhang Liao commanded the van, and the enemy host was utterly defeated. They took the heads of Tadun and many of his tribal chiefs and lesser commanders, while more than two hundred thousand barbarians and Chinese surrendered.
Some people despised him as a time-server and a hypocrite and said that Cui Yan had made a mistake in recommending him.
You should be among the first to joinhim." So Xianyu Fu and all his associates sent messages of allegi ance. An edict appointed him General Who Establishes Loyalty andArea Commander of six commanderies in You province.
Cao Cao had sent Zhao Yan to accompany Xu Huang as Consultant and Adviser to the Army of Cao Ren. Though the other units had not arrived and Xu Huang's command was too small to break the siege, his officers kept urging him to hasten to Cao Ren's relief.
"The plans of war never follow a single track."
He brought people to thecolonies [205] about Xu city, and they produced a million bushelsof grain.
Yuan Shu, under pressure from Liu Biao, brought his men to camp at Fengqiu, where he was joined by a group of the Black Mountain bandits and also by Yufuluo of the Xiongnu.
Zhang Jin was a believer in spirits and demons. He alwayswore a purple-red turban, he played drums and lutes, he burntincense, he read Taoist books; and he claimed that it would all helphis government.
The emperor was furious with Zhang Rang, but Zhang Rang kowtowed and begged for pardon, and in the end he was able to avoid any punishment.
Fan Pang was a particularly strict and stubborn man, and hated evil like a personal enemy.
Likewise in their turn Emperors Xiao-Ming and Xiao-Zhang followed the ideals of the past. They visited school buildings and paid respect to the great teachers; they studied the classics and enquired about the Way of right action.
In the spring, in the first month Dong Cheng's plan was found out.
One of the cavalrymen of the attendant offices of the Yellow Gateskicked angrily at Chen Fan and said, "Die, you old devil!
Xun Yue, Palace Attendant and Custodian of the Private Library,wrote the Shenjian in five sections and presented it to the throne.
Dong He, Huang Quan, Li Yan and others who had originally been given posts by Liu Zhang; Wu Yi, Fei Guan and others who were related to Liu Zhang by marriage; Peng Yang who had been sent to convict service by Liu Zhang; and Liu Ba who had an old hostility [for Liu Bei]: all received honourable positions and were willing to enter Liu Bei's service. Men of ambition vied with one another to join his government, and the people of Yi province were fully content.
As the city [204] fell to a night assault, hemade his escape to the eastern hills; his wife and children werecaptured by Yuan Tan.
Now you want to make a surprise attack on people a thousand li away.If you have too much baggage it will be difficult to move swiftly enough. The enemy will hear of it and will certainly be ready for you.
Yuan Shu named his former officer Hui Qu as Inspector of Yang province and appointed Wu Jing as General of the Household Controller of the Army. Together with Sun Ben, they went to attack Zhang Ying and his fellows.
By the time you are forty you will have a wide reputation. When you reach that point, however, you must keep careful check of your conduct. If you don't, you will lose everything."
Before this, when Yuan Shao and Cao Cao were raising troopstogether [against Dong Zhuo in 190], Yuan Shao asked Cao Cao, "Ifthis affair should fail, what territory would you take?"
"I have also heard that in the harem apartments of the palace there are several thousand and more chosen ladies, and the expense of clothing and feeding them every day is several hundred measures of gold. In recent times, grain has not been expensive but many households are hungry. According to normal rules, [when people are hungry] it indicates the grain is priced high, but in fact it is now cheap. The reason is that so many taxes are required to supply the local government offices [that people must sell their grain in order to pay]. Even when people are cold they are reluctant to don clothing, and in time of hunger they are unwilling to eat [because of the prior demands of taxation]. The people are in distress, yet no-one has pity for them.
Ju Shou objected, "There is a common saying: 'If ten thousandmen chase a hare, and one man catches it, his rivals will stop.' Thatis because the thing is settled.
I now intend to transferpeople from south of the Huai. What do you think?" "At that time," replied Jiang Ji, "your troops were weak and theenemy was strong: had you not shifted the people you wouldcertainly have lost them.
and since Ji province is one of the most powerful, none of the chiefs of other provinces will be able to rival you for the leading position."
Yi province, however, has a population of a million.25 The soilis fertile and the people are wealthy. If you can get this treasure foryourself, than the great design may be achieved."
In the ninth month Cao Cao brought his whole army forward acrossthe Wei.
Wei Yu found out about it, however.He put Ren Fang under arrest, and sent him in bonds to Luoyang.
Then Gongsun Zan became afraid that Yuan Shu would hear about his advice and be angry, so he sent his cousin Gongsun Yue with another thousand horsemen to support Yuan Shu,
hey captured his baggage, his seal and ribbon and other insignia, together with his clothing. They showed these to the people in the city [of Ye] and the defenders were quite discouraged.
Taoqiu Hong was prepared to join, but Hua Xin stopped him, saying, "A coup such as this is a great matter, even Yi Yin and Huo Guang found it difficult.
"On the other hand, should you be so careless as to give Liu Beisome territory which might serve him as a base, and allow the threeto stay together, then I am afraid the flood dragon will get to therain, and will be more than just a minnow in a pond!"
Her elder brother, He Jin the Administrator of Yingchuan, was called to the court and appointed a Palace Attendant.
The Coachman of the Palace of Prolonged Joy, Hou Lan, was found guilty of luxury and arrogance, and of acting with arbitrary authority. Ordered to surrender his seal and ribbon of office, he killed himself.
"Yet my brothers and I are the only ones who, without committing any crime, have been attacked and criticised by ministers of special power, while swarms of false witnesses have joined in plots against us. This has caused your majesty to neglect the compassion worthy of a forgiving mother, but display instead the anger which throws down the shuttle.
All I ask is that you restrain your natural sympathy, which is more than can be borne, and do not add on my account to your sense of distress."
So people both inside [the capital] and outside were influenced by such slogans and competed with one another in giving praise or casting blame. From excellencies and ministers downwards, no one dared oppose these judgements, and visitors came in a constant stream to the doors [of the student leaders].
"In every situation, there comes a time when it is possible to take one thing rather than the other. It is always best to consider the more important matter rather than the lesser; it is always best to seek security rather than danger; and it is always best to judge an opportunity carefully and make no move that may risk your base of operations.
Cheng Pu asked permission to attack Xu Zhao, but Sun Ce said, "Xu Zhao isacting right by his former lord and is faithful to his old friend. Thisis the heart of a true man."
He wanted to see Lü Meng frequently, but was afraid to be a nuisance, so he would peer at him through a hole made in the wall. If he saw Lü Meng was able to eat something he would turn andsmile to those about him and would laugh and chat. When Lü Meng refused his food, Sun Quan would sigh, and at night he could not sleep.
The Palace Attendant Liu Ai saw fires flare up one after another, and he asked the emperor to choose one of the camps as a refuge.
Duan Jiong led light-armed troops to pursue the Qiang. He went out by the Qiao Gate,marching day and night, and defeated them in a series of battles at Sheyan Marsh, Luochuan and on the banks of the Lingxian River. Then he fought them again at Lingwu Valley, and the Qiang were utterly defeated.
Ju Shou advised Yuan Shao, "Your clan has provided honoured assistants to one ruler after another, and each generation has contributed loyalty and brave deeds.
Soon afterwards Jiao He took ill and died. Yuan Shao sent Zang Hong of Guangling to govern Qing province and maintain order.
The Excellency over the Masses Wang Yun, with the Director of Retainers Huang Wan, the Deputy Director of the Secretariat Shisun Rui and the Master of Writing Yang Zan made secret plans to kill Dong Zhuo.
"Those fellows, moreover, hold no authority from the emperor, and their ranks are in complete disorder. Each will rely upon his own strength, and store up resources till he can assess the situation.8 They will never agree on plans or co-operate in attack.
Meng Tuo was an extremely wealthy man. He became a close friend of this slave, showering him and his fellows with presents.
Sun Quan sent Lu Xun, and he attacked and defeated him.
Cao Cao was very pleased. Leaving Cao Hong and Xun You tohold the camp, he took personal command of five thousand horse men and foot-soldiers,
"Sun the General Who Exterminates Rebels is the fineststrategist in the world, a military genius. You have seen for yourselfhow he put Liu [Yao] of Yang province to flight, and you will alsohave heard how he settled my own commandery in the south.
Following Chen Gui's advice, Lü Bu wrote to Han Xian andYang Feng, "You two gentlemen rescued the emperor, and I killedDong Zhuo with my own hand. Each of us made his reputation[through these achievements]. Why do you join rebellion with YuanShu? Far better if we unite our forces, defeat Yuan Shu, and removeharm from the state."
Gongsun Zan wanted to destroy the Wuhuan completely, but Liu Yu planned to bring them to submit through generosity and good faith. So there was enmity between him and Gongsun Zan.
"Even when Zhang Jue has been beheaded and his followers have changed their clothing and submitted to law and order, your servant will still be anxious that things may get worse.
If he does leave, let my head take his place in the box."
If you chase him too anxiously, however, the situation will certainly change.
In the autumn in the seventh month the Excellency of Works Liu Ao left office. In the eighth month the Minister Herald Qiao Xuan from Liang kingdom became Excellency of Works.
It is perfectly possible that other commanderies may have [men of faction], and equally appropriate that Pingyuan does not have them. How can one make a meaningful comparison?If all we did was follow the expectations of high officials, making false accusations against good and honest men, punishing people wrongfully on trumped-up charges, and acting unjustly to defy proper morality – then one could find men of Faction in every household.
So Liu Yu sent him a courteous invitation to join his service.
Liang Ji's oppression and tyranny were becoming worse every day.Chen Gui sent in an account of his crimes and called for his execution,but the emperor would not approve.
Then Wei Gu planned a great levy of troops. Du Ji was con cerned, but said to him, "Such a large-scale recruitment will surelymake the people uneasy. Far better raise troops gradually, and paythem wages.
At this Yuan Shao's army was alarmed and upset and fell into utterconfusion.
Wicked men realise that when a good man's work is noticed, the signs of their own destruction appear. They will use deceit and falsehood and will combine to create distrust and hypocrisy.
In the fifth month the Grand Commandant Deng Sheng left office. The Minister Coachman Zhang Yan of Henan was made Grand Commandant.
As a man, Yuan Shao was generous and elegant. He had ability,and neither pleasure nor anger would show on his expression. Yet he was proud, obstinate and self-satisfied, and seldom followed thebest course. So he came to defeat.
So Liu Bei went to Zhuge Liang, and he had to go three times before he was allowed to see him.
Tian Feng beat the ground with his staff, "Alas, at a critical momenthe throws away opportunity for the sake of a sick child. The pity ofit, the chance is lost."
An edict promoted Zhu Jun of Kuaiji from magistrate of Lanling to be Inspector of Jiaozhi. He attacked Liang Long and beheaded him, he captured several tens of thousands of men, and within a few weeks everything had been settled. Because of his good work, he was enfeoffed as marquis of a chief village and was summoned to court as Counsellor Remonstrant.
The Chief Clerk Zhang Zhao and others said, "Lord Cao is like a jackal or a tiger. He controls the Son of Heaven as a means to justify his attacks, and whatever he does he can claim to support the imperial court. If we oppose him now, it will appear as disobedience to the throne.
"It is for this reason that ominous misfortunes and other strange phenomena have appeared, and that floods and droughts recur in such numbers.
Wang Yun was furious and accused him, "Dong Zhuo, the great bandit of the empire,
The brotherswere defeated, however, in one battle after another, and they with drew to positions of defence.
Cao Cao attacked, defeated and beheaded them all.
Wang Fu and eleven associates were enfeoffed as marquises for their good work.
The Inspector of Jing province Du Shang called up all the local barbarians to attack the rebels of Ai county and heavily defeated them.32 Several tens of thousands surrendered.
As Lü Meng passed Wuhu, the Colonel Who Settles Majesty Lu Xun said to him, "You hold the border against Guan Yu, why have you come down here, so far away? Won't that soon cause us problems?"
Cao Cao appointed his son Cao Zhang, Marquis of Yanling, as Acting General of Resolute Cavalry and sent him to attack them.
The Grand Commandant Yang Biao, the Excellency over the Masses Zhao Wen, the Palace Attendant Liu Ai and the Master of Writing Liang Shao all said, "Duan Wei will not rebel. We stake our lives on it." But then Dong Cheng and Yang Ding forced one of the Investigators of Hongnong to say that Guo Si had come and was in Duan Wei's camp. The emperor was uncertain, and he decided to stay south of the road without shelter.
Then Cao Cao left the General Who Subdues the South Cao Ren, with the General Who Traverses the Open Country Xu Huang, to hold Jiangling, and the General Who Breaks the Enemy Line Yue Jin to hold Xiangyang.He took the remainder of his troops back to the north.
and the detatchment under those two commanders thenprevented the enemy from interfering with my [subsequent] move tothe west of the River.
On the day gengwu [of the sixth month, 27 Jul] the emperor in person carried out a ceremony of sacrifice to Laozi at the Palace of the Shining Dragon.12 A cloth of patterned wool was used on the altar, the vessels were ornamented with gold at the mouth, and the whole was sheltered by a multi-coloured baldachin. The music for the ceremony was that used for the suburban sacrifice to Heaven.
As they came to the water's edge, officers and men struggled to get into the boat. Dong Cheng and Li Le took dagger-axes to keep them back, and the cut-off fingers in the boat [from those who had tried to grasp the gunwales] could be gathered by handfuls.
When Yan province rebelled, Cao Cao said, "Wei Chong is one man who will not desertme."
Zhang Yang was a gentle and peaceful man who did notenforce punishments.
Tanshihuai ordered the chieftains of his three divisions to gather their forces and intercept them. Xia Yu and the others were totally defeated. Having lost all their insignia and their baggage, each of them made their escape with only a few dozen horsemen. Seventy or eighty percent of the Chinese troops died.
When he did arrive, Liu Ba protested again, "If you send Liu Bei to attack Zhang Lu, you will be loosing a tiger in the mountains and forests." Liu Zhang would not listen.
As Beigong Boyu moved against Jincheng, He Xun urged Zuo Chang to send troops to the relief, but Zuo Chang refused to do so.
Zhang Fei commanded twenty horsemen as rearguard. Holdingthe river and breaking down the bridges, he looked fierce and shook his lance, shouting, "I am Zhang Yide.Come and die with me."
Cao Cao now cut off the heads of Guo Tu and his fellows and[also killed] all their wives and children.
When he was asked why,Wang Lie explained that "The robber was afraid I would learn of his wrongdoing. Now that he has shown such sense of shame, his latent good can be brought to life. I gave him the cloth to encourage his feelings towards virtue."
He made his middle son Yuan Xi Inspector of You province and his sister's son Gao Gan Inspector of Bing province.
If you follow your inclinationsand display your courage, careless of the strength and fury of theenemy, then all the army will be anxious. Even if you took the headof their leader and captured their standard,
West of the camp was a large dyke, with thick woods south of it. Cao Cao hid soldiers behind the dyke and drew up only half his force in the open.
Then he heard about the defeat of the emperor near Caoyang, and he summoned his subordinates to discuss taking the imperial title.
Again, it was reported that Mao Jie was resentful and had spoken treason. Cao Cao had him arrested and put in prison.The Palace Attendants Huan Jie and He Xia both tried to explain what was happening, but Cao Cao refused to listen.
Your majesty, however, failed to keep his comments confidential, but allowed them to be known. The ringleaders among the wicked all licked their lips and sharpened their tongues in competition to chew him up, and so that slanderous circular was fabricated.
The Niaoyu Qiang attacked Hanyang, Longxi and Jincheng, but the soldiers of the three commanderies attacked and defeated them.
He was captured, however, and sent to the Northern Prison.
but then he took a sword and killed Zheng Bao, cut off hishead and gave orders to his troops, "Lord Cao has given instructionsthat anyone who dares make trouble will share Zheng Bao's punish ment." The whole army of several thousand men was frightened,and they all submitted and accepted Liu Ye as their leader.
"When an independent command is given," answered ChengYu, " it is granted for a particular situation.
Dong Zhuo appointed Yang Yi from Hongnong as Intendant of Henan, but Zhu Jun led soldiers back to Luoyang, attacked Yang Yi and put him to flight.
His officers wanted to build earth mounds and construct machines for an assault, but Lii Meng said, "If we make engines and earthworks, it will be days before they are ready. The city will be prepared, relief troops will arrive, and we shall not be able to manage them.
Cao Cao said to Xun Yu and Guo Jia, "Now I intendto punish such disloyal fellows, but I am still not strong enough.What can I do?"
They stormed thecity, cut off Li Shu's head and exposed it. His forces, more thantwenty thousand men, were taken over and transferred elsewhere.
At this time the General of the Household Protector of the Xiongnu, Zhang Huan, had been called back to the capital.Because he had just arrived and did not appreciate the true situation, Cao Jie and his fellows pretended to have the authority to appoint the Minister Steward Zhou Jing as Acting General of Chariots and Cavalry bearing the Staff of Authority, and he went with Zhang Huan to lead the soldiers of the five regiments against Dou Wu.
Shen Pei, however, gave orders to his men, "Hold firm andfight to the end! Cao Cao's army is in trouble and Youzhou [YuanXi] is almost here.14 There is no cause to worry that we [329] havelost a leader." When Cao Cao went out to inspect the siege-works,Shen Pei had hidden cross-bows to shoot at him; they only narrowlymissed.
Our forces now are few and isolated, and it is not easy for us to go forward. We shall wait a while, until the commandery levies have all arrived, and then we may resume the advance with combined forces."
He went back to take refuge behind the walls. Yuan Shao had a tunnel dug, with wooden supports, under oneof the towers. When they judged it was at the centre, they set fire [tothe supports]. The tower collapsed, and some of the ruins fell eveninto the citadel.
I would wish that your majesty respect the influence of the moral teaching of Youyu [the sage Emperor Shun],and take thought of the reminders offered by the Kaifeng Ode on the gentle treatment which is owed to a mother.
Her elder brother Dong Chong was appointed Bearer of the Gilded Mace, and her nephew Dong Zhong became General of the Household for All Purposes.
Has Xu Ruzi, then, misjudged his man?" Guo Tai of Taiyuan said, "No.
"Yuan Shao uses fine talk and ceremony to attract men ofgood repute, and many scholars who love words and orna mental show will turn to him.
Guo Tai happened to meet him on the road, and he prepared wine and food to comfort him.
Concerned that He Jin might change his mind, Yuan Shao pressed him to take action, "The battle-lines are drawn and our plans are in the open. How can you still wait and make no decision? If the affair is delayed too long, things will change and you will be a second Dou Wu."
On the day yiyou [10 Oct] the Grand Commandant Liu Yu was appointed Grand Marshal and enfeoffed as Marquis of Xiangfei.
Guo Tai was a man of wide learning, extremely good at debate.
Lord Cao holds the Son of Heaven and so commands theempire, that is one.
One day, in casual conversation with his Palace Attendant Yuan Yan of Chenliu,the emperor asked, "What sort of a ruler am I?"
Qiao Xuan then advised the emperor that "Whenever there is a kidnapping any-where in the empire, the offenders should always be killed. It is not permissible for ransoms to be paid in money or goods; that just opens the way to further crime."
When Jia Cong reached his territory, he enquired about the reasons for the rebellion. Everyone told him, "The taxation requirements were far too heavy and took everything the people had.
59 of the Chronicle of HanJiaif an 19: 214 AD
Heaven has never ceased its abundant attentions to Great Han, and for this reason it has repeatedly produced manifestations and signs to serve as warning or punishment. Its intention is that the ruler should receive the influence, and should change his policy from one of danger to hat of safety.
When Sun Quan heard that Liu Bei had gone to the west, he sentships to collect his sister, and she planned to take Liu Bei's son Shanback to Wu. Zhang Fei and Zhao Yun brought soldiers to interceptthem on the [Yangzi] river and had Liu Shan go back with them.[432]
The women of the harem, however, are now more than a thousand;can their numbers be reduced?
He Jin also sought widely for men who were wise and able in planning, and he recruited more than twenty, such as He Yong, Xun You, Zheng Tai of Henan and others. He Yong was appointed Adjutant of the Northern Army, Xun You was a Gentleman at the Yellow Gates, and Zheng Tai became a Master of Writing. He Jin trusted these men completely.
Zhu Gai, a soldier of Jing province, led a mutiny and joined the Guiyang bandits under Hu Lan to attack that commandery.
Dong Zhuo was at Luoyang. Yuan Shao and the other armies were all afraid of his strength and none dared go forward.
In the winter, in the tenth month, the bandit Ou Xing of Changsha took title as a general. He commanded an army of more than ten thousand men. An edict appointed the Consultant Sun Jian as Administrator of Changsha, and he attacked the bandits and pacified them. Sun Jian was enfeoffed as Marquis of Wucheng.
but they all said Geng [252] Bao was out of his mind andshould be punished.
Guan Yu had his headquarters at the chief point of the siege, withadditional camps on four small hills. Xu Huang spread a rumour that he intended to attack the principal camp, but then made repeated attacks on the four hills.
"When you were chief in Yan province before, you settled the disturbances east of the mountains and so the people turned to you and were glad to accept your rule.
Then Cao Cao sent a messenger to summon him, and Tian Chou urged his servants to hasten his packing.
I have also heard it said that: 'Men of mean spirit are of no use for developing the state or for maintaining a household.'
Now your officials of the Yellow Gates and your Regular Attendants are people who have been punished by Heaven, yet your majesty loves and accepts them, and you constantly pour favours upon them. If you have still failed to obtain an heir, are you sure this has nothing to do with it?
Sun Quan came forward to Lukou and took general command of his forces. Lu Su was sent with ten thousand men to camp at Yiyang and face Guan Yu, while a letter was dispatched post-haste to Lii Meng that he should leave Lingling and come back quickly to help LuSu.
In the sixth month Zhang Rang and eleven other Regular Attendants were enfeoffed as full marquises for their good work during the campaign against Zhang Jue.
"Now, however, the brothers have fallen out and will not joinforces. If they stayed together they would be hard to deal with,
but Lü Meng, Commandant Who Pacifies the North, urged on the van and himself cut off Chen Jiu's head.
The emperor sent the Minister Coachman Han Rong back to Hongnong to make peace with Li Jue and Guo Si. Li Jue released the high officials he had held prisoner, and he also sent back some of the palace women, together with the carriages, robes, insignia and other goods that had been seized from the court.
King Cao of WEI sent the General and Chief Commissioner Cao Hong to face them.
If we take them in now, we open the way to ideas of rebellion: when bandits see advantage they will come forward to attack us, and when they find themselves in difficulty they will simply ask to surrender. Enemies of the state everywhere will become bolder and more dangerous. This is not a good plan." So he continued to press his attacks, but after several engagements he had still not captured the fortress.
"Our previous quarrel," replied Pang Ji, "that was private. Weare talking now about matters of state."
In my humble opinion, it is the situation at present that wide regions of land are not being cultivated, and great numbers of the people have nothing to eat.A horde of petty men have come forward together, and now hold power in the state.They prey upon the empire like ravening birds seeking their food,gobbling up bones and flesh and never satisfied in their greed.
On another occasion, when Jia Biao was magistrate of Xinxi, the poor people of the county were in desperate distress, and many abandoned their infants.
Cheng Yu was originally a man from Dong'a. Xun Yu said to him, "The whole province has rebelled and only these three cities remain. Chen Gong and his fellows will attack them with a strong force. Unless we can bolster their confidence, all three will change sides.
Li Fu realised the guard outside would be tighter and that hewould not be able to play the same trick again. He asked Shen Pei tosend out all the old people and the weak from the city as a means tosave food.
Merit Officer Wei was simply doing his duty. If you killhim today, people will turn from you tomorrow.
Kong Rong,however, argued that, "Ma Midi had high position [as Grand Tutor]even above the excellencies, and he bore the tasselled Staff ofAuthority on an imperial mission. Yet he went out of his way tocurry favour with wicked ministers, and he permitted such people tocontrol him. He was a great officer of the imperial house, and howcan we accept the excuse that he was forced to act as he did? "The emperor may mourn his former servant and have pityupon him, and he may not wish to inflict posthumous punishmentupon him. He cannot, however, grant additional honours."
The Xianlian and other tribes all respected his authority and good faith, and more than a hundred thousand agreed together to accept his words and came to surrender.
On the day bingwu [8 Dec] the Minister of Ceremonies Zhao Wen became Excellency of Works with control of the Secretariat.
The enemy were taken completely by surprise, and all the guards at the entrance ran back to join their comrades.
Wait threeyears, until the people are following their occupations in peace; thenyou can apply the regular laws."
"Soldiers are too often insubordinate," responded Yuan Shu. "We should both be angry about it. Why apologise?"
Liu Xun had a great number of Yuan Shu's former followers, but hedid not have sufficient food for them. He sent his cousin Liu Xie toask for rice from the clan leaders of Shangliao,
Chunyu Shi is concerned for his people, answered Lu Xun, "and that is why he laid accusations against me.
In the sixth month the Inspector of Jing province Wang Min attacked Zhao Ci and killed him.
Cao Cao wanted to go in person to attack Liu Bei, but his officersall advised him, "It is Yuan Shao who is fighting you for the empire,and he may make his move any time. If you turn east, and he comesin behind you, what happens then?"
Sun Quan invited all his officers to a great feast with wine. He ordered Zhou Tai to open his clothing, and with his own hand Sun Quan pointed to the scars of his wounds and asked him how they came. As he replied, Zhou Tai told his full story of combat and war.
"The threat of misfortune on the frontier is like an itch on the hand or the foot; if China Proper should fall into difficulty, that would be an ulcer of the breast or the back."There are still robbers and bandits in the commanderies and counties, and they cannot be eliminated. In such a situation, how can we hope to deal with a foreign enemy as well?
When Yuan Shao heard that Liu Bei was coming, he came outtwo hundred li from Ye to greet him.
In the spring, in the second month, Cao Cao attacked Liyang, and hefought with Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang below the walls. Yuan Tanand Yuan Shang were defeated and put to flight. They went back toYe.
Lü Bu said, "I have orders to kill a rebel minister."
I am a former officer of the Yuan, answered Han Fu," and my ability is not equal to that of Benchu [Yuan Shao].I have taken account of his virtue, and so I cede it to him. The men of ancient times saw honour in such conduct.35 Why do you alone find fault?"
Shan Kuang realised that Yang Bing would investigate the whole affair in detail, so he secretly arranged for Ren Fang and some others to break out of jail and make their escape.
The emperor was greatly impressed by Zhang Huan's words, and questioned the eunuchs. Since his attendants opposed any such idea, however, the emperor could not follow his inclinations.
"Furthermore, if allies attack one another without good reason, we are giving Cao Cao a lever and allow the enemy to take advan tage from our quarrel. This is not a far-sighted plan.
After his army had been defeated, Yuan Shao was ashamed andangry. He became ill and spat blood
Ashamed to have lost his insignia, however, Ma Midi vomited blood and died.
Cao Cao pursued the Yellow Turbans to Jibei and they all surrendered to him. He gained more than three hundred thousand soldiers and over a million men and women. Choosing the best fighters among them, henamed them the Qingzhou troops.
By my estimate, there are some thirty thousand Eastern [Qiang] groups close within the frontier [which have not surrendered]. Communications are not a serious barrier: this is not a situation of rival states like Yan, Qi, Qin and Zhao.Yet they have long troubled Bing and Liang provinces, and they raid and plunder the Three Adjuncts. The capitals of Xihe and Shang commanderies have been shifted back to the interior, while Anding and Beidi are once again isolated and in peril.
Li Xie was found guilty of slandering the imperial clan and was made a convict in the Enclosure of the Left. Within a year, however, the king had been executed, and Li Xie was reappointed as a Consultant.
All in the north had trust in him and submitted to his authority, while both the Wuhuan and the Xianbi sent messengers with offerings of food. Tian Chou treated them well and accepted them, and ordered them not to invade the borders.
He pays small attention to superficial matters, but his government keeps the people at peace. I beg your lordship to think again."
Cao Cao recommended that Wang Lang be called to court, andSun Ce allowed him to return.
At this time it was common practice for the Three Excellencies to obtain their appointments by submitting money to the Western Garden through the Regular Attendants and the imperial nurses. Though Duan Jiong, Zhang Wen and others had great achievements and a fine reputation, they still had to pay their money before they could receive promotion to the highest rank.
Cao Cao went to offer sacrifice at the tomb of Yuan Shao, and weptfor him until the tears flowed.
Chang Xi the bandit from Donghai, joined by many of thecommanderies and counties, rebelled against Cao Cao and turned toLiu Bei.
Each rode forward, set their horses together, linked arms and talked for a time apart.
In the past, You province had to deal with the territory outside the frontiers. The cost was enormous: every year more than two hundred million cash was taken from the taxation income of Qing and Ji provinces to supply [the expenses of You province].
Your servant Sima Guang remarks: If the empire is following the proper Way, true gentlemen assemble at the court of the ruler to correct misbehaviour by men of mean spirit, and there is no-one who dares not submit.When the empire has lost the Way, gentlemen retire into seclusion and do not speak out, hoping that they may avoid misfortune from the men of mean spirit; and yet it still happens that some of them fail to escape.
but just at this time the Administrator of Chenliu, Zhang Miao, rebelled against Cao Cao and called in Lu Bu, so Cao Cao led his army back.
From the fourth month to this [seventh] month there was no rain. One hu of grain cost half a million cash, and there was cannibalism in Chang'an.
Junior officials in the local government saw how things were going and joined the actions against him.
Jia Biao said, "The great misfortune will not be relieved unless I go to the west."
"I am your close friend. You can be sure you have found whatyou were looking for."
Then Guan Yu killed Yan Liang and Cao Caoknew that he was sure to go. He had given him great rewards,
and that he and his brothers spread dirt and corruption everywhere they went.
"I am the one to plan this campaign," replied Cao Cao, "not theenemy.
Zhou Yu left a daughter and two sons. Sun Quan had his eldestson Sun Deng marry the girl, while he appointed Zhou Yu's son Xun as Commandant of Cavalry and gave him his daughter inmarriage.22 [Zhou Yu's other son] Yin became Commandant WhoCarries on Tradition and married a woman of the Sun clan.
In the autumn, in the ninth month the Excellency of Works Cao Caowent east to attack Yuan Shu. When Yuan Shu heard that he wascoming, he abandoned his army and fled, leaving his officers QiaoRui and others to face Cao Cao at Qiyang [miswritten for Qi orKu?].
"So caps and shoes are topsy-turvy, and mountains and valleys have changed their places. Fortunately, however, imperial Heaven has passed down omens and signs of warning.
"My real concern, however, is that although we may be controlling the waters, we are doing nothing about the source, and the spreading flood may yet do more damage.
"But now you are arranging great surveys outside the city in order to construct parks and pleasure grounds. You will ruin fertile land, destroy fields and gardens and drive away the inhabitants, all to maintain herds of wild birds and beasts. Surely this cannot be regarded as dealing with them 'as if you were guarding your infants.'
Lü Meng sent Companions morning and evening to ask after old people, enquiring what they might lack. He gave medicine to the sick, and clothing and food to the hungry and cold.
Others, who have planned rebellion or the greatest iniquities, yet receive pardon through an amnesty. What crimes have the men of Faction committed, that they alone should suffer your unrelieved anger?
Even as the flood continued to rise, Pang De fought on unafraid, though all his men surrendered. Then Pang De took a small boat to go back to Cao Ren's camp, but the water rose still further, and his boat overturned. Having lost his weapons, he held on to the upturned boat alone amongst the waves, and he was captured by Guan Yu.
In the second month Li Jue called him to a meeting, then killed him where he sat.
"As to the matter of the Empress Wei, it was Emperor Wu himself who dismissed her, so that case cannot be used as a precedent.
Liu Bei sent men to call him, and secretly supplied him with soldiers. When Ma Chao arrived, he was ordered to lead his army into camp north of Chengdu. The people in the city were surprised and shaken.
Li Jue and his men arrested the Director of Retainers Huang Wan
The Supervisor of theArmy [Ju Shou]19 is too conservative. He fails to appreciate theopportunity,
Before this, the Gentleman at the Yellow Gates Xun You, the Master of Writing Zheng Tai, the Palace Attendant Chong Ji and others had made plans,saying, "Dong Zhuo is conceited and cruel, with no allies or friends he can trust. Though he relies on his strong army, he is only one man, and he can be killed with a single blow."
When Shun recommended Gaoyao, those who were not men of humane spirit were kept at a distance. Influence on men rests in virtue, it is not a matter of punishments."
Huang Zu, however, was at Xiakou, and Gan Ning's troop could not get past. He was obliged to stay three years with Huang Zu, who treated him as no better than an ordinary soldier.
By this time Yuan Shao had taken over Han Fu's position. He treated Xun Yu as an honoured guest,
This is the time to take him.
The officials in the commanderies and counties did not understand what was really going on, and instead they reported that Zhang Jue reformed men by his fine teaching and that this was why the people turned to him.
Then Qu Mu, Supervisor of the Palace Workshop,50 drew his sword and cut off He Jin's head at the front of the Hall of Excellent Virtue.
Yang Qiu replied, "Your crimes and wickedness are beyond description, and even death is not sufficient to wipe out the debt. And you dare talk about seniority in order to ask for some remission!"
And as to the idea that Yuzhou is the only man who can face up to Cao Cao: Yuzhou has just been defeated, how is he to resist this threat?"
"I cannot imagine," replied Taishi Ci.
Then locusts came and there was a great famine. The supplies in Lu Bu's army were also exhausted, and they both drew away.
"Whether a work is good or bad depends upon its intention, andundeserved slander or praise may be discovered through carefulenquiry. [If those who make appointments are careful to] listen toreports and check the facts, to ensure that the name matches reality,then it will impossible for officials to hold power by deceit and thusdisturb the people.
So Tao Qian sent Zhao Yu to take a memorial to Chang'an.
Furthermore, though Tao Qian is dead, Xu will not be easy.
"But things did not work out that way, and I was called to thecapital and appointed Colonel Who Arranges the Army. 12 Onceagain I changed my ideas, and now sought to work for the nation, todestroy rebels and gain some achievement. I would have had thestone tablet at the gate of my tomb inscribed with the words, 'Theformer General Who Subdues the West, Marquis Cao of the Han.'This was my whole ambition.
At thistime, when the main army is away and there are strong enemiesoutside, you are the security of the empire. If you go unthinkinglyfar away on campaign, even if you are be successful it is still badstrategy."
There was a prophecy which read, "The one to replace Han shall be 'high road'," and Yuan Shu said that the characters of [191] his personal name and style agreed with it.
He who finds his true lord will prosper, but the man who makes a bad choice will die.
In the twelfth month, on the day xinchou [1 Feb 194] there was an earthquake.
but Chen Fan maintained his refusal. Over time they exchanged as many as ten letters on the matter; and in the end Chen Fan did not receive the enfeoffment.
Helian was neither so capable nor so strong as his father, and he was greedy and licentious. Later he led a raid on Beidi, and a man of that commandery shot him and killed him.
Lu Zhi built a siege-wall, dug a moat around the city, and constructed scaling ladders. He was ready for the final attack when the emperor sent Zuo Feng,
Xu Shao said to Liu Yao, "When Zhai Rong leads out his army, he is little concerned about the cause he should fight for.
Dong Zhuo summoned the Intendant of Jingzhao, He Xun,to be a Consultant. At this time the General of the Left Huangfu Song held command of thirty thousand soldiers at camp in [You]fufeng,
Wang Yun had Shisun Rui write an imperial order in his own hand to give to Lü Bu, and Lü Bu ordered the Commandant of Cavalry Li Su, a man from his own commandery,17 with the swordsmen Qin Yi, Chen Wei and a dozen others, to disguise themselves in guards' uniforms and stand behind the Northern Lateral Gate to wait for Dong Zhuo. As he came to the gate, Li Su stabbed him with a lance.
Before this, the Commandant of the Capital Cui Yan had recom mended Yang Xun of Julu to Cao Cao, who treated him courteously and gave him office.
He stationed Guan Yu at Jiangling, Zhang Fei at Zigui and Zhuge Liang in Nan commandery, while he himself stayed at Chan- ling. Sun Quan had no choice but to call Sun Yu back.
He became afraid and fled into hiding, but Liang Ji caught him and killed him.
In recent years, each time Yuan Shao received an edict from theemperor, he was concerned it would cause him some difficulty. [Asa result] he now wanted to bring the emperor to stay by him.
In the winter, Gu Yong the Administrator of Yulin, by honest and gracious conduct, induced the surrender of more than a hundred thousand of the Wuhu people. They were all brought into settlement within the borders of the empire, [their leaders] were granted caps and belts [as marks of official authority], and seven new counties were opened up and established.
Liu Zhang promoted Cheng Ji to become Administratorof Jiangyang.
Kong Rong the Administrator of Beihai was a man of haughtybearing, with ambition to settle the disorders of the time. He was, however, erratic and vague in his ideas and ineffectual in hisactions.
When they came to battle, he placed the horse-drawn carriages at the front, and the lime was thrown up with a favouring wind. The enemy could not see.Then he set fire to the cloth [which had been tied to the horses' tails]. The horses were terrified, and fled into the midst of the enemy ranks.Then he had the war-chariots brought from the rear, bows and crossbows firing at random, while the sound of gongs and drums shook the air.Overwhelmed as if by waves, the enemy force was smashed and scattered; uncounted numbers were killed or wounded in the pursuit which followed. They took the heads of the leaders, and the whole commandery territory was now at peace.
Cao Cao was afraid that Liu Bei might come north, take over the Di barbarians of Wudu, and so threaten the lands within the passes. He asked the Inspector of Yong province, Zhang Ji, about it.Zhang Ji advised him, "Encourage the people to go north for harvest and avoid the enemy. Give generous rewards to the oneswho arrive first. When those first-comers appreciate the advantages, others are sure to follow."
Dou Wu would not agree. He gave orders for Shan Bing, together with Yin Xun and the Imperial Clerk Zhu Jin, to examine Zheng Li by various methods, and his confession implicated Cao Jie and Wang Fu.
Xu Ruzi is a man of purity and high principles. Even if he was hungry, he would not eat [if it was wrong to do so], and if he was cold he would refuse to put on clothes [if he was required to act wrongly to obtain them]. He drank the wine and ate the meat that Jiwei [Mao Rong] gave to him; and that was because he recognised that Jiwei was a worthy man.
Duke Cao of WEI was considering reintroduction of the mutilatingpunishments. He issued an ordinance was issued, saying, "Someyears ago, Minister Herald Chen gave his opinion that the death penalty was kinder and more humane. Can the Palace AssistantClerk explain his father's reasoning?"
After the Yuan had been defeated, ChenLin came before Cao Cao. "When you wrote those proclamationsfor Yuan Benchu," he said, "you needed only to insult me. Why myfather and my grandfather?" Chen Lin begged his pardon. Then CaoCao forgave him and had him act as joint head of his secretariatwith Ruan Yu of Chenliu.
The Commandant of Cavalry Bao Xin had lately returned from recruiting troops in Taishan.67 He advised Yuan Shao that "Dong Zhuo has a strong army and will be inclined to rebellion. Unless you make plans in good time he will be sure to seize control. Since he has only just arrived, his men will be weary and exhausted. If you attack by surprise, you can take him."
but Wen Ping replied, "If I cannot keep the province intact, then I wait for punishment [a phrase of apology and refusal]."
The Director of Retainers Ying Feng sent in a letter, "The importance of the empress-mother is so great that the prosperity or failure [of the dynasty] depend upon her.
"A man who acts dishonourably," replied He Kui, "damages only himself How can he injure others?
and so I am a member of a faction. Moreover, I was once sentenced to convict service in the Enclosure of the Left, and at that time the university student Zhang Feng and his colleagues sent in a petition on my behalf; and so the Faction people have supported me. I should be punished too."
Zhang Yang the Administrator of Henei sent several thousand men bearing sacks of grain on their backs to feed them.
Cao Cao sent his officer Cai Yangagainst Liu Bei, but Liu Bei killed him.
I am fleeing now to escape sharp weapons, but I have no wish to make trouble.
After this letter was presented, the emperor did attend in person at the ceremony of Welcoming the Ethers in the Northern Suburb, and he also carried out the ceremonies at the Hall of the Circular Moat.
An imperial edict summoned the Household Counsellor Yang Ci and others to attend at the Gate of Metal and Shang, and they were asked how these omens and strange occurrences might be halted.
Qiao Xuan's young son had been at the gate of the family mansion when he was seized by kidnappers, who then took refuge in a tall building [on the property] and sought to ransom him. Qiao Xuan, however, refused to give anything.
Later [at the time of the rebellion], the Inspector Zuo Chang embezzled great quantities of grain from the military supplies, and He Xun protested.
In the winter, the Xianlian, Chendi and other groups of the Qiang made attacks in the provinces of Bing and Liang.The Protector [of the Qiang] Duan Jiong led the Loyal Auxiliary of Huangzhong to attack them.
The former Grand Commandant Chen Fan became Grand Tutor and shared control of the Imperial Secretariat with Dou Wu and the Excellency over the Masses Hu Guang.
Fu Xie, looking very serious, turned him down, "If I did well and no one noticed, that is simply a matter of luck.
Fan Pang replied, "Confucius said, 'Look upon good as if to an ideal; look upon evil as if you were asked to thrust your hand into boiling water.'
Then Lü Bu remembered with resentment how Yuan Shu hadfailed to receive him before [in 192, after he had fled Chang'an].16Though his daughter was already on the road, he sent to bring herback and cancelled the engagement. He bound Han Yin and senthim to the court at Xu city. Han Yin was executed and his headexposed in the market-place.
Wang Lang ran away. Yu Fan escorted Wang Lang back to his base camp and thenacross the sea to Dongye. Sun Ce followed in pursuit, attacked and completely defeatedthem. Then Wang Lang came to surrender. [199]
Han Sui killed Bian Zhang, Beigong Boyu and Li Wenhou, took over their troops so that he commanded more than a hundred thousand men, and went forward to besiege the headquarters of Longxi commandery. The Administrator, Li Xiangru, rebelled against Han and made an alliance with Han Sui.
"I regret only that I am too weak to raise my sword to right the wrongs of the empire. How can you speak of submission?"
In the winter, in the tenth month Marquises of Title were appointed a for the first time, as a reward for military service.
He raised his whip to strike him, but Sun Quan called out and stopped him.
Yuan Shao chose a hundred thousand good troops and ten thousandhorse to make an attack on Xu city.
and he thenbrought in teachers and set up schools.
"I beg that a summons be sent for Du Shang to attend the Minister of Justice, to answer me face to face on this matter. That will be quite enough to make clear where truth and falsehood lie.
Su Buwei also dug up the grave of Li Gao's father, cut off the headof the corpse, took it away with him and hung it up in a market-place.
Nonetheless Han Fu and Yuan Shao sent Zhang Qi, former Administrator of Lelang, with a deputation to offer Liu Yu the imperial title.
but Zhou Yu said, "I have command of the army and cannot leave my post. If your master will be gracious enough to call upon me, that is just what I expect!"
Xiahou Yuan chased after him towards Lueyang city. He was thirty li behind Han Sui, and his officers wanted to maintain the pursuit, but then someone suggested they should attack the Di barbarians of Xingguo.
The Commandant of Cavalry Cui Yan of Qinghe also objected[to the proposed campaign], "The Son of Heaven is in Xu city, andall people look to him. You cannot attack." Yuan Shao would notagree.
Before this, Liu Xu had been kidnapped by the Yellow Turbans, and the people of his kingdom paid a ransom to get him back. The court was of the opinion that he should be restored to his kingdom,
The soldiers maintained a running fight for forty li, then they came to Shan and made camp to defend themselves.
Wang Yun had spoken earlier with Shisun Rui about a special edict to pardon Dong Zhuo's followers, but then he became uncertain about the idea, saying, "
The mother of the empress was granted the title Lady of Wuyang.
Foolish though it may be, I have a plan, and with your help I would seek to put it to effect. May I do so?"
As Yuan Shao's cavalry approached Wuchao,44 some of Cao Cao'sattendants said, "The enemy is coming closer, we ask to send adetachment to hold them off."
[In the eleventh month] on the day wuchen [14 Dec]36 Yuan Shaowas appointed as Grand Commandant and enfeoffed as Marquis ofYe.
The Qiang scattered and fled to the east, but gathered again at Shehu/Shoot Tiger Valley, setting armed guards at the upper and lower entrances.Duan Jiong planned to destroy every one of them, and did not wish them to have any possibility of scattering and fleeing again.
Dianyu, of the Goujiu tribe of the Qiang, held the rest of the enemy at bay with his sword, saying, "Chief Clerk He is a worthy man. It would be a crime against Heaven for one of you to kill him."
In the second month on the day guimao [4 Apr] there was an earthquake.
In the twelfth month the Xianbi, together with the Hui and the Mo people, raided the two provinces You and Bing.
"I have heard that our young emperor is wise and intelligent, with a virtue which has come early to fulfillment. Though the empire has not yet received his grace, all turn their hearts to him.
The Grand Commandant Yang Bing memorialised that he be summonsed with a cage cart, and Hou Can committed suicide on the way.
In the spring, in the first month on the day renwu [30 Jan] the Colonel of the City Gates Dou Wu became General-in-Chief.
Dong Zhong was the son of the elder brother of the Dowager of Perpetual Joy.
"The official entourage of the Heir should be chosen on the basis of personal virtue. How can one accept these worthless creatures from the grave-mounds?
In the sixth month on the day yiwei [14 Jul] the emperor arrived in Wenxi.
Yang Feng knew that Liu Bei had been an enemy of Lü Bu, andhe entered into secret negotiations with Liu Bei for a joint attack.
So he went to the Imperial Prison,and he was there tortured to death. His students and former subordinates all suffered proscription from office.
The emperor sent Palace Attendants and Masters of Writing to make peace, but neither would agree.
He senta special invitation to Sun Ce's younger brothers Quan and Yi tocome to court, and he appointed Zhang Hong as an Imperial Clerk.
They replied, "They get together to promote one another, and they seek to act outside the law."
Both Yuan Feng and Yuan Wei became well known, and they held a number of high positions while they were still young.
His Gentleman of the General Staff Han Song ofNanyang and his Attendant Officer Liu Xian of Lingling said tohim, "Now two warriors are at grips with one another and thebalance of the empire rests with you.
On the day renwu [14 Mar] the three excellencies recom mended that the grave of the emperor's mother the Lady Wang be moved [to the Wenzhao Mausoleum of Emperor Ling], and that she be granted posthumous title as the Mourned Empress of Emperor Ling.
Li Ying found out about this, and he led his men to break the place down, seize Zhang Shuo and put him in the Luoyang prison. When all the evidence had been gathered, he was killed.
Tian Chou collected twenty horsemen from his family retainers, and they went together up to the western pass, across the frontier, along the northern mountains, and then straight to Shuofang. From there they travelled by side-roads to Chang'an and delivered the message.
At this time the enfeoffments and rewards were passing all bounds, and the harem favourites of the emperor were becoming more and more numerous.
Your majesty shows sympathy for the miseries of all within the four seas, and you wish to relieve distress by regulating the currency and coining money in sufficient quantities;but that is like keeping a fish in a cauldron of boiling wate.
He made sure the moat was cut deep, and only when the campwas completely ready did he go to Cao Cao to present a full report.
So they opened the siege, and Han Zhong did come out to fight. Zhu Jun attacked and completely defeated him and they took more than ten thousand heads.
Lü Bu led his army to a hundred paces from Zhang Xun's camp,then the troops of Han Xian and Yang Feng shouted together andturned on their allies. Zhang Xun and his men were defeated andfled. Lü Bu's soldiers pursued them and took the heads of ten of hisofficers. Almost all his soldiers were killed, wounded or drowned inthe river.
You should avoid all contact with people in general, have no erratic comings and goings, and be very careful not to say one word about the Liang clan.
and when Yuan Tan arrived he failed to gain theinheritance. Yuan Tan went to camp at Liyang and styled himself Generalof Chariots and Cavalry.
Fa Zheng said, "We can attack."
Sun Jian's advance division replied, "We have long suffered the toil of fighting and labour, and we come to ask you for supplies."
Someone told him, "The Qingzhoutroops have already made a complaint against you. You should go toour master at once to explain yourself."
And he bought wine and meat to eat with him.
As the man himself is gone, another hundred lives cannot redeem him.
Cao Cao went to welcome the men bringing up supplies. "Anotherfortnight and I shall have defeated Yuan Shao for you," he toldthem. "Then I need trouble you no more."
In this year the emperor ordered a market set up in the harem apartments and had all his women trade there. They robbed and fought one another, and the emperor dressed as a peddler, joined the crowd and drank wine and feasted with them.
Among the people was a certain Chen Yuan, who lived alone with his mother. The mother went to Qiu Xiang and accused Chen Yuan of failing to act with proper filial piety.
As he came to Ba commandery, the Administrator Yan Yanlaid his hand on his heart and sighed, "This is what describes 'a manwho sits on a poor hill alone, and lets loose a tiger to defendhimself.'"
When he is destroyed, Zhang Fei will be forced to retreat."
The Major of Wu commandery, Sun Jian of Fuchun, called up trained soldiers and obtained more than a thousand men. He assisted the province and commandery forces in their attacks on Xu Sheng.
Then Yan Zhong took ill and died, and Han Sui and the others struggled for power and began to kill one another. So they were gradually weakened.
So when he was an Associate Major, Sun Jian saw things the way I did, and he has some useful talents.Now, however, for no good reason he has joined the Yuan gang, and in the end he will die too.
Through the aid that Fa Xiaozhi brought him he was able to soar and fly high, so that nothing can hold him back. asks?"
Yang Ci replied, "The Apocrypha of the Spring and Autumn Annals say: 'When Heaven sends a rainbow, all the world is angry and all within the seas is in confusion.'
Besides, a vicious and deceitfill heart, if it stands in a brilliant court, will it last for long?"
Jian'an 8: 203 AD
Orders were given for the palace treasury-to issue gold coins and silk as a bounty for the expenses of the army. Duan Jiong was appointed General Who Routs the Qiang.
All his men were starving and sick, and the greater part of them died.
Sun Ce did this. That night he had a great number of fires lit topretend there were soldiers there,
Before this, Zhang Jue of Julu had been worshipping the Yellow Emperor and Laozi and preaching magic and devilry among the people, calling his doctrine the Way of Great Peace.
And some of the leaders asked the director of the funeral, and he replied, "There was a scholar came here earlier, with coarse and simple clothing, weeping for grief. He did not write his name."
I know Liu Biao: he cannot plan far ahead, and his sons are likewise of poor quality; neither is capable of inheriting or maintaining his fortune.
An edict was issued that the excellencies and ministers, and commanderies and kingdoms, should recommend Extremely Filial candidates.
In the winter, in the tenth month, the Yellow Turbans of Qing and Xu provinces made another rising, and ravaged commanderies and counties.
Su Fei, Chief Controller to Huang Zu, recommended Gan Ning several times, but Huang Zu refused to give him a commission.
Accusing him, he said, "Han Song, howdare you betray me?"
Zhang Jue had already died of an illness, but they broke open his coffin, defiled his corpse, and sent his head to the capital.
In the sixth month, on the day bingxu [1 Aug] there was an earthquake.
The Prefect of Insignia and Credentials, Cai Yan of Runan, and the Consultant Liu Yu memorialised on behalf of Cheng Jin and Liu Zhi. Their words were quite outspoken, and they were dismissed from office.
Cao Cao also gave gold toone of Zhang Xiu's best fighting men, Hu Che'er, and when ZhangXiu heard he became suspicious and anxious, and he made a suddenattack on Cao Cao's army. Cao Cao's eldest son Ang was killed,
I am quite convinced that Li Ying and the others are men of most certain loyalty and steadfast honesty, with all ambitions centred upon your imperial house. Truly, these are the ministers who might serve your majesty like Hou [Ji], [the Excellency over the Masses] Xie, Yi [Yin] and Lü [Shang].9Yet now they are falsely and wrongly accused by a criminal gang of wicked subjects. The empire is chilled at heart, and all within the seas are disappointed in their hopes.
He said to Zhang Miao, "The empire is divided and fallen, and the brave men rise up together. With the forces of a thousand l you occupy territory on the open plain, exposed to war on every side. Holding a sword, you may gaze around proudly, and you are worthy to be a leader of men. Yet you prefer to take your orders from another. Isn't that mean-spirited?"Now the provincial army is away fighting in the east and this area is empty. Lu Bu is a strong soldier and a superb fighting man. Call him in for a while, govern Yan province together, watch the situation of the empire and wait for the changes of circumstance. Now is now the ideal time for such a strategic move."
Zang Ba, bandit leader of Mount Tai, attacked and defeated theChancellor of Langye, Xiao Jian, at Ju, and captured Xiao Jian'streasure and provisions.
In the spring, in the first month the emperor sent the Regular Attendant Zuo Guan to go to Hu county and offer sacrifice to Laozi.
Before this, Cai Yong had some disagreement with the Minister Herald Liu He, and his uncle Cai Zhi, who was Minister of the Guards, also had a quarrel with Yang Qiu the Court Architect.
"But now one of them has suddenly asked your help, and youcan see from this [how weak they are].
If Yuan Shao should take the offensive [against us] and LüBu gives him help, that would present a considerable danger."
When Zhao Fu and his companions arrived, they said to Han Fu, "Yuan Benchu's army has not a single measure of grain. Even now his men are deserting. Zhang Yang and Yufuluo have only recently joined him, and they will not accept his orders. He cannot match us.
In this respect, though Duan Jiming achieved good work in his victorious campaigns, no true gentleman could approve his conduct as a military commander.
but now there are bandits far away and an army is raised close at hand. This is no way to show bravery; it is simply wasted effort."
Han Fu still refused this advice. Leaving his office, he went to lodge in the former mansion of the Regular Attendant Zhao Zhong, and he sent his son to take the seal and ribbon [of his ppointment as Governor] and hand them to Yuan Shao.
and he was reprimanded by edicts issued in the emperor's name. His clerical officers were actually punished, though Chen Fan himself was too well known and too influential, and there was nothing that his enemies could do against him directly.
and Feng Gun then asked that Ying Feng, former Administrator of Wuling, should accompany him, with title as Attendant Gentleman of the Household.
He remembered his last promises to Jingsheng [Liu Biao], and all the army respected him for his feelings. He refused to abandon the people that came to join him, and he was prepared to share their misfortunes.
Yet Du Mu says, "When Xun Yu encouraged Wu of Wei tohold Yan province, he compared him to Gaozu and Guangwu;when Cao Cao was at Guandu and he urged him not to withdraw toXu city, he made comparison with Chu and Han.
In the summer, in the fourth month, the Grand Commandant Cao Song left office.
Approving this policy, Cao Cao sent Zhang Ji to Wudu, where he transferred fifty thousand Di people into the territory of [You]-fufeng and Tianshui.
But the empire is now in great disorder, and brave men rise up against one another. It is the way of a wise man to judge and choose the leader who can truly take control and end the disorder.
Wang Chang, a son of Wang Gong,37 had at one time been Administrator of Nanyang. Concerned by the great [63] numbers of imperial relatives and powerful families in the commandery, as soon as he arrived he began to govern with the utmost firmness and ferocity. On occasion, when some member of a great clan had committed a fault, he sent officers to destroy the homestead and cut down the trees, and they would fill up the wells and smash the kitchens.
At the appropriate time, therefore, Zhao Bao advanced to the attack. The enemy were totally defeated, but his mother and his wife both died in the fighting.
They were fewer than six hundred in number, but they charged at speed,they completely defeated the enemy, and they took Wen Chou'shead.
Then Lü Bu combined forces with Han Xian and Yang Feng,and they all headed for Shouchun, advancing by land and [220]water as far as Zhongli, and plundering as they passed. They turnedback north of the Huai, leaving a letter in insult to Yuan Shu.
Sun Ce was at this time leading his soldiers west to attackHuang Zu. Just as he reached Shicheng, he heard that Liu Xun wasat Haihun. He sent his cousins Sun Ben and Sun Fu with eightthousand men to camp at Pengze,40 while he himself led Zhou Yu,acting Administrator of Jiangxia, with twenty thousand men in asurprise attack on Huan.41 They captured the city, and Sun Ce madeprisoners of Liu Xun's family, together with that of Yuan Shu andover thirty thousand of their followers.
The two men respect your great reputation,they will be pleased that you are going, and they are sure to comeand visit you with a very small escort.
When he received his orders, however, he sighed and said, "I should be father and mother to my people, yet instead I am supposed to rob my flock because of present custom. I cannot do that."
More than ten thousand officials and commoners died, the bodies scattered in the streets.
There were any scholars and gentlemen who were sympathetic and interceded for him, but they could do nothing to save him.
Liu Biao wassurprised and asked him what was wrong. "In earlier times," repliedLiu Bei, "I never left the saddle, and my thighs were thin.
Zhang Mancheng had been camped in the vicinity of Wan for some three months,
Then they intended to make him Deputy Director of the Secretariat, but Jia Xu said, "Deputy Director is a senior appointment, and the whole empire looks to it.55 My name has not been well known before, and people will not respect it."
"At this time there are masses of wicked men causing trouble inChina, and the four seas have no peace. The imperial throne is themost important thing, and all our work must be devoted to itsprotection and support. "This is the time for all men of good will to clear the imperialway, but such a task is more than any one man can manage alone.Truly the heart and the belly and the four limbs depend upon eachother, and if one is absent, it will surely be missed.
If things are the way you describe, enquired Sun Quan, "then why does Yuzhou not submit to him?"
When Cao Cao attacked, Sun Quan called Liu Bei to help him.
In the spring, in the first month, Cao Cao attacked Zhang Xiu. Ashis army reached the Yu River, Zhang Xiu came to surrender withall his troops.
So Sun Ce went with Lu Fan of Runan and his clansman Sun He to escort his mother to Qu'a to stay with her brother's family,
"Lu Bu is a common man's hero: he is rough, he has small affection for anyone else, he is brutal and arrogant.
In the third month the Court Architect Kong Rong was sent with theStaff of Authority to appoint Yuan Shao as General-in-Chief, withgovernment over the four provinces Ji, Qing, You and Bing.
Chen Gui therefore asked permission to retire to his home on account of age, but he was summoned once again to take position among the Masters of Writing [in the Imperial Secretariat].
Some years ago I was sent west with Zhou Shen to attack Bian Zhang and Han Sui in Jincheng. I suggested to Zhang Wen that I should use my troops as a rearguard for Zhou Shen, but Zhang Wen would not agree.
When the other guests had withdrawn he invited Lu Su to stay back,and they sat with their tables together and drank face to face. SunQuan said, "The Han house is in danger, and I have in mind tofollow the great examples of Huan [of Qi] and Wen [of Jin].58 Howwould you help in this?"
Cao Jie told the emperor, "There is trouble outside. I beg you to come to the front section of the Hall of Virtuous Light."
All the common fellows of the commandery were unhappy about this.
In the eighth month Yuan Shao brought his forces gradually forwardand established his position on some sand-dunes stretching severaldozen li east and west.
He had only seven hundred under his command, but hisorders were clear and whenever his men fought they were alwayssuccessful. They were known as the Shock Troops.
How much more would this apply now, when we lack resources both of men and of goods, and matters are far worse than they were in the past?
GongsunZan did not reply, but increased his preparations for defence. Hesaid to his Chief Clerk Guan Jing of Taiyuan, "Everywhere in theempire men are fighting like tigers. It is obvious that no-one canmaintain a siege against me for as long as a year. So what can YuanBenchu do?"
Lü Bu, however, was angry, saying, "I have forbiddenwine, but now you brew it. You are using it to get people into plotsagainst me!"
Li Xian spoke: "I have always felt this way. He has expressed things exactly the way that I would."
Before this, Duke Cao of WEI had appointed Zhu Guang as Administrator of Lujiang, to camp at Huan and set out a great area of paddy fields.
The people of Anping and Ganling seized their kings and madecause with the rebels.
Kong Bao of Lu kingdom was an old acquaintance of Zhang Jian,and when Zhang Jian was making his escape he went to call upon him.Kong Bao was not at home, but his younger brother Kong Rong, at that time aged sixteen, found him a hiding place.
If good men have their place about him, then every day he will receive good instruction;but if bad men are permitted in his company, then every day they will encourage his evil traits.
Our people think only of running to escape death; they have no intention of standing to fight for their lives. As the rebels in the west continue to advance, the Chariots and Cavalry General [Zhang Wen] is isolated and in serious danger. Should he be defeated, there would be no way to rescue him.
"Furthermore, if you delay matters, there will be changes. The example of Yin is not far off. You must make your mind up soon."
The people of Nanyang were suffering under their forced labour services. In the winter, in the tenth month there was a mutiny led by Hou Yin, an officer of the garrison at Wan.
When the two men arrived at the commandery capital, everyone saw that they had no clothes, and naturally asked why.Jiang Gong gave some excuse, but he made no mention of the bandits.
Cao Cao's grain supplies came through the mountains from the north, and Huang Zhong planned to intercept them. He was away longer than he had said,
Cao Cao's army was small, his supplies were exhausted, histroops were tired and ill, his people were troubled by the taxationand levies and many turned to Yuan Shao. Cao Cao was worried,and he wrote to Xun Yu that he was thinking of a retreat to Xu city,so that Yuan Shao would be compelled to fight him there.
About this time White Rider [Zhang Cheng]23 attacked Yuan[county in He]dong, and Gao Gan entered Huoze.
Zhao Du, Huo Nu and other men of Gu'an killed the Inspector ofYou province and the Administrator of Zhuo commandery, 9 theWuhuan of three commanderies attacked Xianyu Fu at Gongping.
"Go back to Bodi and join up with Jing province, then graduallymake plans to return. This would be the worst plan.
Yanxi 延熹 8: 165 AD
In the fifth month on the day xinyou [14 Jun] there was a comet in the Heart constellation.
Then why go yourself?
Liu Yan in Yi province had secret plans for rebellion.
The Steward of the Palace of Perpetual Joy Chen Qiu said to Liu He, "You are a member of the imperial clan and you hold position as one of the Three Excellencies. All the empire looks to you with respect as a guardian of the nation. How can you behave like an empty echo, sitting complacently and taking no action?
Pang Degong's nephew, Pang Tong, was a dull fellow when he was young, and only Pang Degong and Sima Hui were able to recognise his quality.
"And send the Director of Retainers to establish his admini stration and bring the people under his control.
Jian'an 3: 198 AD
In the sixth month there was great rain and hail in [You]fufeng.
His Headquarters Officer Liu Zihui replied, 102 "If you raise troops on behalf of the state, how can there be any question of Yuan and Dong?"
In the fifth month there was a fire in a pavilion of the park of Kangling [the tomb of Emperor Shang].
Duan Jiong pursued them, and kept up a running fight day and night.He rationed the food, and his men took snow to drink, and after more than forty days they came to Jishi Mountain, two thousand li beyond the frontier.They took the heads of the great chiefs of the Shaohe tribe and compelled the rest of them to surrender.Then they returned.
When soldiers rose up in the provinces and commanderies, LiuChong led his troops to camp at Yangxia and took title as General in-Chief Who Supports Han.
The General Who Displays Majesty was Sun Yu, son of SunJian's younger brother, who also held office as Administrator ofDanyang.
At the present time my name appears upon your service list, I have handed you my pledge, and you are the only person tocommand me. You may send me through fire and water and I shalldie without complaint.
Cao Cao pressed him again, and then Xu Shao replied, "You? A good servant in time of peace, a dangerous chieftain in time of trouble."
replied Gongsun Du. "What is this Yongningplace?" He put the seal and ribbon in his arsenal.
Cao Cao had just lost Yan province, his army's provisions were exhausted, and he was prepared to accept the offer.Cheng Yu said, "It appears, general, that you get flustered under pressure. How else could you be contemplating such a foolish move?
Now the various groups of the Xianlian constantly cause trouble. They attack and destroy our cities and towns; they kill and plunder our people and their property; they break open tombs and leave the corpses exposed: they are a misfortune to both the living and the dead.
He put forward Sun Quan's ideas, then discussed the situation of the empire and their ambitions to assist it. Then he asked Liu Bei, "Yuzhou,where do you plan to go?"
Fu Xie put hand to his sword and shouted at Huang Yan, "You, an official with a seal, have become the messenger-boy for a gang of rebels!"
but when he asked for just five dou of grain and five sets of cattle-bones to feed them,
13 February 161 - 1 February 162
In the summer, in the fourth month on the day dingsi [miswritten for xinsi, 22 May],when the emperor had been ill and was just recovered, there was a great assembly at the Weiyang Apartments.
"As for the Honoured Lady Feng, her tomb has once already been broken into and robbed, so her bones have been exposed and scattered amongst those of criminals, and her spiritual soul is defiled and contaminated. Furthermore, that lady did no great work for the empire. How can she be raised to the equal of the highest honour?"
Dong Zhuo appointed his younger brother Min General of the Left, while Dong Huang, son of his elder brother, was Colonel of the Centre Army. Both had control of military affairs.All the members of the Dong clan or relations by marriage held rank at court.
Yuan Shao's follower Pang Ji said to Yuan Shao, "You have undertaken a great work, but you are still dependent upon others for subsidy and supplies. Unless you take a province for yourself, you will never be able to act independently."
So your majesty's rule is sometimes good and sometimes bad."
In earlier times there were men who calculated success and failure, worked out their policy and followed it through:they were Yi [Yin] and Huo [Guang].
Kuan was the son of Liu Qi.64 He had held office in three commanderies, he was warm, generous and kind to everyone, and even when he was startled or put out he would never speak angrily or show concern.
Wang Yun had always treated Lü Bu well, and Lü Bu told Wang Yun how Dong Zhuo had nearly killed him. So Wang Yun told him about the plan against Dong Zhuo, and asked him to act as agent on the inside.
Surely you do not believe Governor Liu is theruler to end the troubles? So how can you advise your elders toaccept his leadership? If you keep trying to impress him with yourabilities, you can no longer be my companion, and I shall break offour relationship."
Embarrassed, Yuan Shao had Chen Rong led out, remarking, "You are not one of Zang Hong's people. This is pointless."
"Hou Can, younger brother of the Regular Attendant Hou Lan, has shown the utmost greed and cruelty, and has brought upon himself misfortune and destruction.
It will be a disaster if they decide to surrender.
"As I see it, the Han house is fallen forever and Cao Cao is hereto stay. Your best plan is to hold the east of the Yangzi [295] andwatch the conflicts of the empire.
An edict appointed Hua Xin, a former Senior Clerk under the Grand Tutor, to be Administrator of Yuzhang.
Lu Xun found out all the details, and he prepared amaster-plan for how Guan Yu should be taken.
Cao Cao ordered Xiahou Dun to attack Wei Gu and the others,but before they had arrived, Du Ji said, "Hedong has thirty thousandhouseholds, and they cannot all wish to be in rebellion.
Lu Zhi was eight feet two inches tall,with a deep voice like a bell. By nature he was stern and upright, with a strong sense of morality.
When Zhong Yao arrived at Chang'an he sent letters to MaTeng, Han Sui and the others to explain matters to them. Both MaTeng and Han Sui sent their sons to attend the emperor.
Yang Feng was delighted with this letter, and he said to hiscolleagues, "The armies of Yan province are nearby at Xu city.There are soldiers and there are supplies. These are what theemperor should rely on."
Wang Xiu said, "Though Guan Tong the Administrator ofDonglai is across the sea, he has not rebelled and he will certainlybring help."
Cao Cao sent a letter to Sun Quan, asking him to send a son ashostage.
The Minister of the Household Deng Yuan, the Minister of Justice Xuan Fan, the Minister Steward Tian Fen, and the Minister of Finance Zhang Yi all died.
Liu Bei sent men to call him, and secretly supplied him with soldiers.
"You are a man from the western provinces, you commanded soldiers when you were still young, and you are well trained in the arts of war.
In the winter,in the tenth month it was ordered that King Cao of WEI should wear a crown with twelve pendants, and he should ride in a Root of Gold chariot drawn by six horses, with chariots of the five seasons to escort him.
they captured one after another the outposts that Guan Yu had set to guard the river. Guan Yu heard nothing about it.
Keeping their attentionthere, he quietly sent Xu Huang and Zhu Ling, with [424] four thousand horse and foot, over the Puban Crossing to establish abridgehead west of the Yellow River.
At this time the Regular Attendant Guan Ba, a man of considerable talent, had arbitrary authority within the palace. Dou Wu first reported [against him] and had him arrested, together with the Regular Attendant Su Kang and some others. All were found guilty and put to death.
They will have to make further levies of troops, and the need for reinforcement will continue without end. This will become a drain on all the people of China, and will reduce our strength against the barbarians.
When Li Ying met Guo Tai, he remarked, "I have met many scholars, but never a man of such quality as Guo Linzong.
"We cannotmove so fast," said Liu Bei. "If you take the opportunity of this meeting," urged PangTong," you will not have to fight him and you can settle the wholeprovince at your leisure."
Scholars of loyalty and generosity, of purity and cultivation, not only were they respected by the ministers and gentry, they were appreciated by even the common people.
and Liu Biao was angry. Because Huang Zu,the Administrator of Jiangxia, had a quick temper, he sent Ni Hengto him.
Six of the provinces had great floods, and the sea at Bohai flooded inland.
He Yong of Nanyang had been a close friend of Chen Fan and of Li Ying. [At the time of their fall in 168] he was also due to be arrested, but changed his name and went into hiding in Runan.Together with Yuan Shao, he [now] acted as a contact for those who sought to escape, and he went frequently in secret into Luoyang. With advice from Yuan Shao, he gave help to well-known scholars who had been caught in the toils of the Faction affair, and they prepared ways for them to escape and go into hiding. Great numbers of people were saved.
He wrote a letter to Gongsun Zan saying, "Shao is not a son of the Yuan clan."
Now Dong Zhuo is coming. Why don't you go back quickly to your homelands?"Yuan Shao urged He Jin to take this opportunity to deal with them. He repeated three times, and when He Jin would not agree he sent letters to the provincial
Cao Cao sent a letter to Lü Bu, pointing the situation out tohim. Lü Bu was frightened and wanted to surrender.
When He Pu saw the letter and realised Liu Bei was at Gongan and Guan Yu at Yiyang, he was so angry and ashamed he wished the ground would swallow him.
A few days later, however, Cao Cao changed his plan: hewould settle Jing province first, and leave Yuan Tan and YuanShang to wear one another out. Xin Pi had been watching hisexpression, he realised what he had in mind and he spoke to GuoJia.
Cao Cao dividedLangye and Donghai to form the commanderies of Chengyang,Licheng and Changlu, and appointed Zang Ba and his fellows asadministrators and chancellors.
All this time Liu Bei had been in camp at Fan,but Liu Zong did not dare let him know about the surrender.
The common people have the saying, 'No robber will trouble a family with five daughters,' meaning that women can impoverish a household.The women of your household may be enough to impoverish the state!"
Before this, the Administrator of Jianwei, Li Yan, had made Yang Hong his Officer of Merit. Before Li Yan left Jianwei, Yang Hong had been appointed to Shu commandery. In turn, Yang Hong recommended his Clerical Assistant at the Gate He Zhi as a man good at making plans, and while Yang Hong was still in Shu, He Zhi was made Administrator of Guanghan.
"The famous leaders of the past were given an axe to rule their armies, and any of them would cut off a man's head if it served his purpose.
In the fifth month Cao Cao destroyed his hills and tunnels, andordered a moat of forty li to be dug right around the city [of Ye]. Atfirst he made it shallow, to look as if it could easily be crossed,
The men had just lost their leader, they were troubled and could not think what to do.
And the emperor in the end had no recourse but to dismiss Hou Lan.
Moreover, the people of our clan have been slaughtered. Do not recall [the example of] Wu Zixu? How can you still accept this ruler?
Zang Ba went into hiding, Cao Cao raised a search and foundhim, then sent him to call Wu Dun, Yin Li, Sun Guan and theothers; all came to Cao Cao and surrendered.
You have too few soldiers to maintain defence; you should accept the invitation of these Qiang and other tribespeople and go back to our homeland. Wait until a worthy man appears, and then join him."
So Liu Bei travelled in a simple boat to call upon Zhou Yu. He said to him, "So you have decided to oppose Lord Cao. That isexcellent.
"In earlier times," answered Lu Su, "though Emperor Gao [ofHan] wanted to honour and serve the Provisional Emperor, he couldnot manage it because he was under threat from Xiang Yu.
You are a descendant of the house of Han, and your loyalty and sense of honour are known throughout the world. If you bestride Jing and Yi and hold their strategic passes; if you deal well and peacefully with the barbarians of the west and south and join infriendship with Sun Quan; if you maintain order and good government inside and watch for opportunity in the rest of the empire: then the work of a hegemon may be achieved and the house of Han can rise once more.
"Again, matters of selection and promotion should be in the hands of those who are formally entrusted with that responsibility, and all private approaches for appointment in the government should be strictly forbidden.
Ma Yuanyi was arrested and was torn asunder by chariots at Luoyang.
On the day bingzi [bingwu = 29 Sep?] Guo Si again planned to force the emperor back to take up residence at Mei. The Palace Attendant Chong Ji learnt of it, and he secretly told Yang Ding, Dong Cheng and Yang Feng to gather at Xinfeng.
"""Now you are considering only the easy points of the past and you do not appreciate the difficulties of the present. So you plan to do something out of the ordinary and you are confident of success. Isn't that dangerous?"" Wang Fen also discussed his plans with Hua Xin and Taoqiu Hong of Pingyuan."
Hu Fang said, "Weiming9 wishes to return to his estates and relinquish his official duties, and that is why he is bothering me.
Later, he also gathered experts in the calligraphy of [govern ment documents written on] tablets one foot long, official scripts and the Bird Seal style. Altogether, there were now several score [of these litterateurs and calligraphers].
Sun Quan sent an open summons to call him back, while at the same time making plans with him in secret.
He travelled as far as the Meng Crossing, and from there he sent in a memorial setting out in the strongest terms what was wrong with the whole system. He then killed himself by taking poison.
You, master and servant, are both stupid anddisobedient. You hide away in the furthest corner of the empire andturn your backs to the royal commands. You claim to usurp appoint ments and you interfere in the powers of the emperor. You shouldbe killed at once. How dare you rudely and lightly slander a greatman!"
Cao Cao recommended Liu Fu of Pei state as Inspector of Yangprovince.
while Lei Xu, leader of a force in Lujiang, brought twenty or thirty thousand men to join Liu Bei.
Gongsun Zan is no match for Yuan Shao, and although he has beaten him once, Yuan Shao will get him in the end."
"Quite easily," replied Jia Xu.
Sun Quan sent Zhang Hong to his territory. Because Zhang Honghad originally received his appointment from the north, some peoplesuspected his ideas might go further. Sun Quan, however, would notattend to such suggestions.
On the day jiazi [23 Aug] the General Who Maintains the South in Peace Yang Ding became General Who Gives Tranquillity to the West and opened an office like the Three Excellencies.
Before this, after the Dowager Dou had been appointed empress, the emperor saw her very rarely, while the Chosen Lady Tian Sheng and others received his favours.
The emperor appointed him General of the Household Who Routs the Xianbi.Many leading ministers did not agree, and a conference was called so that all officials to discuss the question in the court.
In former times, the land within the passes Guangwu changed the capital to the city of Luo."For many years the citizens have been at peace and contented here.
A moment later troopers came up from both sides and they broke off their fight.
"Then I joined carts like a palisade to make a protected way andmarch south. That tactic ensured I could not be defeated, but it alsomade us look weak.
In the third month the Intendant of Henan, He Miao, attacked and destroyed them. He was appointed General of Chariots and Cavalry.
Cao Cao said, "When we raised loyal troops, all the people supported us, and they did so because our cause is just.
Tian Chou then spoke to the elders and said, "Now the people here are as many as a city, yet there is no single government for them and no laws to guide them. I fear this is not the way to keep our peace.
He had a thin gruel made, and shared it with all the army. He also killed his favourite concubine to feed his men.
Duan Jiong got down from his horse to join the battle, and fighting continued until midday.His sword was broken and arrows were exhausted, but the enemy also began to draw back.
but Xun Yu did not feel that Yuan Shao would ever be able to gain the empire. Then he heard that Cao Cao was brave and ingenious, so he left Yuan Shao and went to join him.
This matter had to pass for checking through the offices of the excellencies, and the Grand Commandant Chen Fan protested: "The men being investigated are some of the most popular and celebrated men of the empire. They are loyal and patriotic ministers, with merits worthy of pardon over ten generations.
So Cao Cao sent Cao Ren with cavalry to attack Liu Bei. Hedefeated him and drove him away, took back control over all thecounties that had rebelled, then returned.
Since Bian Rang had been known for his ability, all the leading men of Yan province were worried.
armies rose up against oneanother, and all were short of provisions and grain. None could besure of supplies from one year to the next. When men were starvingthey plundered, and when they had eaten they threw the rest aside.The people were broken like tiles and scattered, and countlessnumbers died of natural causes, without enemy action.
So the bandits let them both go, and only took their clothes and their goods.
Of the six commandery units in Qing province, five have men of Faction. Is Pingyuan so well governed that it has none?"
Cao Cao defeated Liu Bei and took his wife and children.
Jian'an 23: 218 AD，13 February 218 - 2 February 219
At this time there were still thirty thousand trained soldiers within the city, and sufficient grain and cloth to last a year. All his followers were prepared for a fight to the death,
In the third month on the day wuxu [12 May] there was an amnesty for the empire.
"Zhang Xiu, on the other hand, has no-one to make plans forhim, and he will be glad to have me. So both my family and I willbe safe."
Up to this time Qing province had been prosperous, and well protected by armed men. Whenever Jiao He caught sight of the rebels, however, he would always retreat, and he had never tried the winds and dust of campaigning or the clash of banners and drums in battle.
Sun Quan called to him, addressed him by his style, comforted him in sincerity, and ordered Companions to wipe his face with a hand-cloth.
In the second month on the day wuyin [10 Mar] the high officials recommended that a Palace of Prolonged Autumn be established.
I have notheard you make any inquiries about the customs of the people, norhow you can help them in their distress. Instead, you calculate thenumbers of their armed men. Do you really believe that is the mostimportant question? Is this what the men and women of myprovince must expect from you?" Cao Cao looked shamefaced, andthanked him.
Few people of that time saw anything remarkable about him, and only the Grand Commandant Qiao Xuan and He Yong of Nanyang thought him unusual.
From the time of the Yellow Turban rebellion the emperor had paid attention to military affairs. Jian Shi was strong and active and good at planning for war, the emperor himself appointed him and even the General-in-Chief was under his orders.
On the day wwww [17 Aug] the Minister of Ceremonies Yang Biao was made Grand Commandant with control of the Secretariat.
In the second month Yuan Shang made another attack on Yuan Tanat Pingyuan, leaving his officers Shen Pei and Su You to hold Ye.
Sun Jian, however, the little fool, is quite competent. You must warn my officers to be careful of him.
Zhou Yu and Lü Meng both recommended him, and Sun Quan treated him with particular courtesy, just like his long-established officers.
Li Dian came to theirrescue, and then Liu Bei withdrew.
Gui Lan, Grand Chief Controller of Danyang, and the CommanderyAssistant Dai Yuan killed the Administrator Sun Yi.
Since the defeat of Yuan Shao, however,your authority makes the empire tremble and no-one would think ofopposing you. It is only human nature that men should love theirland. They will not be pleased if you move them about, and I amsure they will become restless."
The Southern Shanyu [Yufuluo] compelled Zhang Yang to join him against Yuan Shao, and they camped at Liyang.
Zhang Xian the Administrator of Changsha was a difficult manto deal with, and Liu Biao did not treat him with proper courtesy.
He relies upon the fact that the government at the capital is in disorder, so he dares to delay and refuses to come: this is treachery.
Once you have dealt with Lu Bu, you can make an alliance in the south with [Liu Yao of] Yang province so as to attack Yuan Shu and move towards the Huai and the Si.
At this time the Senior Clerk in the Department of the West, Ding Yi of Pei state, was in Cao Cao's favour. He had been involved in the arrest of Mao Jie, so all the ministers were afraid of him and watched him with caution.
Zhou of Yin was cruel and tyrannical, yet Boyi died for him because he could not eat the millet of the conquering Zhou dynasty.
All those present were shaken.Only the Master of Writing Lu Zhi said, "In former times, Taijia held position but lacked understanding, and the faults of [the King of] Changyi were more than a thousand, so there were reasons for the depositions.
That area, however, is all dry land, and good cavalry can gallop there.If your honour takes Xu province now, you may be sure that Cao Cao will come to fight for it in a matter of weeks. Even if you stationed seventy or eighty thousand men to hold the territory, it would still be cause for concern.
Under influence [from the eunuchs], the Masters of Writing advised that, "Xiang Kai has not put forward a proper discussion, and he disregards the models of the classical writings. He misrepresents the signs of the stars and constellations, forcing their interpretations to fit with his own ideas. He has distorted the facts to make false accusations against his superiors. We ask the matter be passed to the Director of Retainers, to put this man into the prison at Luoyang and assess his crime according to law."
When the Masters of Writing received the edict block they questioned it, "We ask that the General-in-Chief come and discuss this further."
They fought from morning to midday, and the men from WU lost heart.
Hu Teng of Guiyang had been a Senior Clerk in Dou Wu's office. He placed Dou Wu's corpse in a coffin and carried out the funeral ceremonies. For this he was proscribed.
If you send soldiers against Guo Yuan, he will be attacked on twosides [with the forces of Hedong and with your own], and his armycan surely be taken.
Then Jia Cong issued a proclamation to say that everyone should carry on his occupation in peace, and he received and comforted the homeless refugees and remitted the taxes and corvee levies. Only [184] the most troublesome ringleaders were executed, and he then made careful selection of the best men to show their ability as heads of counties. The disturbance was settled within a year, and all the people were at peace.
Cao Cao now regretted that he had brought Pei Qian back so soon,
Now sovereign perfection has not been achieved, and so there come the portents of dragons and snakes.The Odes say thatThe cobras and other serpents.Are the auspicious intimations of daughters.
Before this, the Southern Shanyu Yufuluo had come to power [among the Xiongnu], but the men of the state who had killed his father made rebellion and set up a Gudu Marquis of the Xubu clan as Shanyu.
and he also awarded marquisates to Zhang Lu's five sons, to Yan Pu and some others.
Liang Ji and his wife Sun Shou both committed suicide on that same day.Liang Buyi and Liang Meng had died earlier.
As they entered his tent, they met thecolonel Xu Chu and their faces changed expression. Realising theirintention, Xu Chu killed them.
When the feast was ended he ordered his own carriage to wait, while Zhou Tai went with an escort of foot-soldiers and horsemen, beating drums and blowing horns to make a fanfare as he left.
With the authority of his imperial commission, however, Chong Shao rebuked them angrily and sent them away in confusion. Then he faced Dong Zhuo and accused him directly of disloyalty. Dong Zhuo apologised, and he led his army off to Xiyang village.
Those whom I once cared for as children or grandchildren arenow bandits and enemies who would drink my blood. It reaches a point that [the Mandate] has shifted and power is gone, yet still the ruler does not waken and repent. Surely that is because wealth and high birth foster brutality, while licence and vice bring stupidity and cruelty.
I excuse myself from what I cannot manage, and I speak of things that are important: that is the duty of a subject."
Cao Cao sent the Registrar to the Excellency of Works, Zhao Yan, to act as liaison between the armies and give counsel on all matters. There was now good will and good order.
When Liu Bei attacked Chengdu he gave orders to his army, "Anyone who harms Liu Ba will be executed with all his family."
"Yang Xiong observed, 'The six kingdoms were foolish andstupid. They weakened the Ji [family of the Zhou dynasty] for theYing [family of Qin].'
Wu Kuang and Zhang Zhang, officers of He Jin, were outside the palace when they heard that he had come to harm. They wanted to lead their men inside, but the gates of the palace were closed.
In the fifth month the Xianbi ravaged the Dependent State of Liaodong.
The enemy commanders will be convinced that any substantial force must come [directly east] from Wuzhong, and if it cannot get forward it will have to withdraw. They will be idle and will make no preparations.
If we press them hardthey will protect one another, but if we go easily they will begin toquarrel.
They went back to reorganise their defences, and so the hearts of the [WEI] forces were set at ease.
"The best plan is to force all the people of Baxi and Zitong tocome in west of the Fu and Inner Rivers. Burn their granaries anddestroy all the grain in the fields.
The rebel Qiang were besieging the Protector Xia Yu in the Herding Office, and He Xun gathered provincial and commandery troops to relieve him. They came as far as Hupan but were defeated there by the Qiang.
Tian Feng said to Yuan Shao, "Now that the idea of shifting thecapital has not worked out, you must make early plans against Xucity and prepare to receive the emperor yourself.
East of the passes, observed Wang Hong, "the loyal armies are bubbling like a cauldron. They wanted to destroy Dong Zhuo, and now that he is dead it should be easy to deal with his followers.
Cao Jie and Wang Fu still attempted to maintain the debate, arguing that "The family of the Empress Liang [of Emperor Huan] was wicked, treacherous and rebellious, and she was given a separate tomb at Yiling. Emperor Wu disgraced and dismissed his Empress Wei, and the Lady Li shared in his posthumous sacrifices. Now the crimes of the Dou family are very serious: how can it be permitted that the late dowager should share the imperial tomb?"
He Xia of Xiping considered that in Ji province the terrain was flat and the people were numerous, and this was what an ambitious man would look for. A land open on all sides to war, it was not as good as Jing province, where the territory was difficult and there were fewer people. It would be better to go there. So he turned to Liu Biao.
Though Yuan Huan received rewards and presents, he spent every thing and had nothing kept by in his house. When he was short he[458] would beg from others, but he made no show of his clevernessand insight, and people of the time respected his integrity.
"Now the General of the Left [Liu Bei] is under siege in Hanzhong by Xiahou Yuan, Guan Yu is in Nan commandery and our lord [Sun Quan] is close upon him.
Then the fightingmen will become steadily weaker, civilian officials and people willbecome stronger, and we shall strengthen ourselves at the expenseof our enemies."
The Inspector Yang Yong later recommended him as Administrator of Hanyang.
but Cao Cao said, "If the enemy hear I have gone to the west and then come back, Wuyang will automatically berelieved. If they do not come back, I can destroy their base and they will certainly not be able to take Wuyang."
Making plans in time of emergency, in wisdom and courage surpassing others; again how do you compare with Yuan?
Then Cao Cao sent Zhong Yao against Hanzhong. Liu Zhangheard about it and was worried.
"Don't you want to defeat him?" asked Xu You. "Why won'tyou tell the truth?"
"But now the officials have lost control, and have let the whole province fall into rebellion. Cui Lie is one of the highest ministers, yet he takes no thought to the real needs of the state and has no plan to restore order. Instead he proposes to abandon ten thousand l of territory, and I have the gravest concerns about his strategy.
He promised to present them to Lü Bu, butwhen he failed to do so Lü Bu went to ask for the goods himself.
The sage does not oppose the time, and he cannot let such an opportunity slip."
He asked him aboutscholars who could make plans, and Xun Yu recommended hiscousin Xun You the Administrator of Shu commandery, and GuoJia of Yingchuan.
In appointing men to office he lovedthe unusual and chose the strange, so many of his subordinates werequick and frivolous, with slight ability.
They cut my men's line of retreat," replied Cao Cao, "and bydoing so they gave me a 'death ground.' Then I knew I would win."
Cao Cao called for men to break the enemy line, and the Major Dian Wei of Chenliu led out a group of volunteers. Lu Bu's archers and crossbowmen fired at them from every direction, and the arrows and bolts came down like rain.
Ji Ling and the others were amazed. "General," they said, "youhave the authority of Heaven." Next day they met to drink again,and afterwards each side withdrew.
They said to him, "Lord Yuan always treated you with respect, and courteous orders were brought to you five times, but you quite properly refused to submit to him.
Huangfu Song was a leader who could understand and sympathise with his men. Whenever his army halted to make camp he made sure that all the tents were set up in order before he went to his personal quarters, and his soldiers were issued with food before he had his own. It was for this reason that he was successful everywhere he went.
but someonesaid, "A man like this: if he has no affection for his own parents,how can he care for others?" Zhang Lu gave up the idea.
The Inspector of Yang province Wen Hui said to the Inspector of Yan province Pei Qian, "Though the enemy come against us, we have nothing to worry about here.
Zhang Rang and his fellows went in and told the Dowager that the troops of the General-in-Chief had mutinied, and that they were burning the palace and attacking the entrance to the Imperial Secretariat. Forcing junior officers of the palace to help them, they led the Dowager, the Little Emperor and the King of Chenliu, and fled along the Covered Way to the Northern Palace.
I want to attack Liu Zhang first, and when I have dealt with him I shall go on to Zhang Lu. Once the south is united, then even if there were ten of Cao Cao we would have nothing to worry about."
Only when Cao Cao had crossed the Han did Wen Ping go to attend him.
The Grand Commandant Chen Fan and the Excellency of Works Liu Mao both made protest, asking pardon for Chen Jing, Liu Zhi, Zhai Chao and Huang Fu. The emperor was not pleased,
Jiao Chu proclaimed himself Inspector of You province, andpersuaded the civil officials in all the commanderies to abandon theYuan and transfer their allegiance to Cao Cao.
When Guo Yuan arrived, he did march straight ahead to crossthe Fen. Everyone tried to stop him but he would not listen.
The Grand Commandant Wenren Xi left office. The Minister Coachman Li Xian of Runan became Grand Commandant.
but Shen Pei wasfirm and proud: he would neither bend nor make excuses, while XinPi and others never ceased to weep and beg [for his death]. So hewas executed.
It is truly extraordinary that your majesty again shows concern for the remnants [159] of this group of wicked servants, and does not proceed to destroy them all.
All things, however, have their truth and falsehood, and all matters of law have their right and wrong.The simple fact is that I am not guilty, so there is nothing an amnesty of pardon can do for me.
As his own forces were too weak to act alone He Xun also went back to the capital district,
From the single family of Liang Ji, at one time or another there had come seven marquises, three empresses, six honoured ladies, two generals-in-chief, seven wives or daughters who were granted fief cities and given the title of "Lady," three men who married princesses, and fifty-seven other men who became ministers and generals, intendants and colonels.
nd Zhou Shang and Zhou Yu both went back to Shouchun.
Gongxiao caused trouble with our ruler through his own vain ambition, and he brought the consequences upon himself. Personally, I would never raise a weapon against him, but how can I help him to hide?" All accepted the justice of his argument.
Just at this moment, Hedong is a key point in the empire.Can you suggest a reliable man to keep the place under control?"
An imperial letter offered him the reward of a hundred million cash, but he firmly refused it.He brought his army in triumph back to the capital.Feng Gun gave special praise to the good work of Ying Feng during the campaign, and recommended him as Director of Retainers.He also sent in a letter asking to be relieved of his duties on account of age,1but the court would not allow this.
"By the rules of warfare, a desperate bandit is not pressed, a retreating army is not pursued."
There was still disorder in theregion: the barbarians were threatening, officials and people had run away to join the tribes, and families with armed retainers gathered troops and plundered everywhere.
He kept his followers at a distance, there was no-one he would trust, and his best councillors and commanders gradually drifted away.
He appointed Wei Gu as Chief Controller, acting also as his Assistantwith command over the Office of Merit,
Worried by this, the emperor sent the Palace Attendant Liu Ai to say to the General Who Proclaims Righteousness Jia Xu, "As a loyal officer, you have been honoured and favoured by his majesty. Now the Qiang and other barbarians are everywhere. You must do something."
but then she stopped, putoff her mourning clothes and bathed in scented herbs. She talkedand laughed and appeared happy.
Huangfu Gui, Administrator of Taishan, sent in a memorandum, saying, "The most difficult bandits have been eliminated, and Taishan is largely pacified. Now, however, I hear reports that the Qiang have joined once more in rebellion.
Sun Quan sighed with admiration, "Those others disappointed me,
Indeed, when Yuan Shao heard how few soldiers Cheng Yuhad, he did not move against him.
There were great rains day and night for twenty days and more, and the floods destroyed people's houses.
But then Tao Qian began to put his trust in slanderers and evil men, granting them office and keeping loyal and upright men at a distance. As law and government were poorly administered, the province declined into disorder.
Cai Yong and Cai Zhi were sent to the Luoyang Prison. They were impeached for "presenting slanders against high ministers of state and for abusing senior officials: Great Iniquity; for public execution."
Fan Pang said, "Gaoyao was a loyal minister in ancient times. If he knows I am innocent, he will explain things properly to the Emperor [of Heaven]. If I should be guilty of something, then what is the point of making a sacrifice?" Because of this, other prisoners also ceased to offer sacrifice.
Sun Sheng says: [265]Hua Xin lacked the spirit of [Bo]yi and the Four Greybeards, for[while he made no attempt to avoid responsibility] he failed tomaintain his honour as a royal minister. He lost heart at the words of a false scholar [Yu Fan] and he linked arms with a follower ofoppression and plunder [Sun Ce]. His position was taken and hisreputation was lost. What could be more shameful?
The Excellency of Works Zhang Ji left office. The Minister of Finance Zhang Wen became Excellency of Works.
He was always afraid of Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi, explained Cao Cao. "If I had put pressure on them they would naturally have joined forces, but when I eased it they were sure to betray one another. That is all there was to it."
The Lady Xu put him off, saying, "I beg to wait untilthe end of the month, when I have completed the sacrifice and takenoff my mourning clothes. Then I shall attend your orders."
Soon afterwards Dong Zhuo also called Huangfu Song [to the capital] to take appointment as Colonel of the City Gates.Liang Yan, Chief Clerk to Huangfu Song, said to him, "Dong Zhuo ravages and plunders the capital city; he has dismissed one emperor and set up another simply on his whim. Now he has sent you a summons. If things turn out badly, you will suffer danger and ill fortune, and at the very least you will surely be humiliated and miserable.
The emperor had his mind on the old capital [at Luoyang], and he also sent messengers to proclaim [his wish for peace]. After ten exchanges, Guo Si and Li Jue agreed to a truce, each giving a favourite son as hostage.
The emperor told them to put their caps and shoes back on and continue to serve him as they had always done.
Yuan Tan said to his brother Shang, "My equipment is no good.That is why Cao Cao defeated me.
Sui Gu, a detachmentcommander, killed Yang Chou in his turn and led the army north tojoin Yuan Shao.
The Minister of Ceremonies Yang Bing, the Chief of the Market in Luoyang Mu Mao, and the Gentleman of the Palace Shangguan Zi all sent in memorials to plead for Li Yun.
I am certain that fifty thousand good men will be enough to deal with them. Do not worry about it."
An edict summoned Huangfu Gui for appointment as Administrator of Taishan.
In the spring, in the second month Wang Guo's army was discouraged and exhausted. As he raised the siege and set off, Huangfu Song sent his men to attack him.
Then Liu Biao died, and Cai Mao, Zhang Yun and their party had Liu Zong take the succession.
And the reason he did not reply to questions about affairs of state: his wisdom can be matched by other men, and his foolishness they will not understand."
Before this, Liu Zhang had appointed Xu Jing as Administrator of Shu commandery.
HHS 8:330 (2b), the Annals of Emperor Ling.Jianning 2: 169 AD:15 February 169 - 3 February 170
When Lu Bu first came to Liu Bei he behaved with utmost courtesy,saying, "You and I are both men of the borders.
When the Imperial Clerk Raolong Zong went to Dong Zhuo to make a report, he failed to take off his sword. He was immediately flogged to death.
Liu Biao loved the people and cared for scholars. He maintained aneasy government and had no trouble in his territory. Of the scholars from the west of the passes, from Yan province and from Yu, thosethat came to him were numbered by the thousands.
Dong Zhuo sent his army against Yangcheng. The people had gathered for a ceremony at the local altar and the soldiers beheaded all the menfolk.They took heavy carts, loaded on the women and girls, bound the men's heads to the shafts, and returned singing and shouting to Luo[yang] with the claim that they had attacked bandits and taken a great number of prisoners.
From this time on, successive kings of Shule deposed and murdered one another, but the [Chinese imperial] court was not able to restore order.
Gongsun Zan took the authority to give appointments to his officers: Yan Gang as Inspector of Ji province, Tian Kai as Inspector of Qing province, and Shan Jing as Inspector of Yan province.
In the spring, in the first month all the provinces and commanderies east of the passes raised troops to attack Dong Zhuo. Yuan Shao, Administrator of Bohai, was elected leader of the covenant.
Anything sent to the court from any part of the empire, and also the annual tribute, all was brought first to Liang Ji, and the emperor had second choice after that.
Then Chen Qiu put forward the following document: "From the time the late dowager came to the Fragrant Chambers, she showed the virtues of intelligence and motherly feeling. When she encountered unfavourable times, she established our present +sagacious and intelligent ruler, and so she maintained the ancestral temple [of the imperial clan]. That achievement was most valuable.
He Xun replied, "Your subject has heard that the former kings were brilliant in their virtue and took no thought of weapons,
When his army is destroyed he will have to withdraw to the north, and in this way the power of Jing [under Liu Bei] and of Wu [under Sun Quan] will be greatly increased: we can balance Cao Cao like the legs of a tripod cauldron.
However, the succession of one man to another within the same lineage requires no more than to open out a table and examine records in order to discover who is next in line. What is so difficult about it?
Li Jue and his men replied, "Dong Zhuo was loyal to Your Majesty but Lü Bu killed him without good cause. We are avenging Dong Zhuo; we do not dare make rebellion.
The bandits of Changsha and Lingling entered Guiyang, Cangwu and Nanhai commanderies.The Inspector of Jiaozhi and the Administrator of Cangwu took flight at the news of their coming.The Palace Assistant Imperial Clerk Sheng Xiu was sent to take command of troops called up from the province and commanderies and to attack the enemy.He had no success.
The Inspector Wei Kang sent his Attendant Officer Yan Wen toadvise Xiahou Yuan of their danger.
Your majesty, however, has not rejected lust and desire, and you apply the punishment of death far more than there is need. If you disregard their doctrines in such a fashion, how can you expect to obtain blessings from them?
The rebel leader Han Zhong re-occupied Wan and opposed Zhu Jun once more. Zhu Jun sent in an attack from the southwest with battle cries and drums, and all the enemy went to deal with it. Zhu Jun himself led picked troops secretly to the northeast, and they climbed the wall and got into the city.
Orders were given that the Three Excellencies should sent in lists of senior officials who had been oppressive and extortionate, and they should be dismissed.
The general [Cao Cao] knows me well, but he keeps pressing me like this. I assure you, I would rather cut my throat."
Sun Quan gathered light cavalry to lead a charge against theenemy, but his Chief Clerk Zhang Hong objected, "Weapons areevil and war is a dangerous business.
Hu Cai wanted to attack Han Xian, but the emperor sent explicit orders to forbid him.
Sun Jian moved his camp to the east of Liang, but was defeated by Dong Zhuo's officer Xu Rong. He reassembled his scattered troops and went forward to camp at Yangren.
He said to Zu Lang, "You attacked me once in thepast, and chopped the saddle of my horse.
In this [eighth] month the White Planet [Venus] encroached upon the Commanding General star of the House constellation and then entered the Supreme Subtlety Enclosure.
Lü Bu's officers said to him, "You always wanted to kill Liu Bei. Nowyou can leave Yuan Shu to do it for you."
but Zhang Liao said to the men with him, "Don't move!
In the autumn, in the seventh month on the day jiwei [6 Aug] there was a fire at the Door of Continuing Excellence in the Southern Palace.
Lü Bu escaped through the Wu Pass to Nanyang, and Yuan Shu treated him extremely well.
In the spring, in the first month Cao Cao returned to Ye.
It is part of the code of honour for a loyal minister not to praise his own achievements, so I find it embarrassing to offer even a few words on my own behalf.On the other hand, if you compare my success with the way things were managed before, [you will find that] I may be excused from any accusations or criticism.
By use of the ancient statutes, however, it is still possible to eliminate greed and extortion and put a stop to violence and slander.
"I was guarding a city and I could not hold it," replied Yang Fu."My masters are dead and I did not die. How can I face the worldeven for a moment? Ma Chao has turned from his father andrebelled against his lord.28 He mistreats and kills the leaders of theprovince. Am I the only man concerned about this? All the gentle men of the province are put to shame.
Supposing I had not been here, who can say how many men wouldhave claimed the imperial title or how many would have sought to rule as kings? "It may be, however, that as some people see how mypower has grown, and recognise that I am not the sort of man totrust indefinitely on the favour of Heaven, I am concerned lest theymisjudge me, and say I have ambitions for the throne.
Particularly at this time, as the fortunes of the emperor are in decline and there are war-horses in the suburbs, we cannot allow a treacherous minister to hold his brush among the attendants to a young emperor. It is no advantage to the sage virtue of the ruler, and it will cause our party to suffer contempt and abuse.
In the eighth month it was ordered that an observation tower should be built, four hundred feet high, on the Ating road.
At the present day, all the world is united in our empire, and it is only the Yellow Turbans who are in rebellion.
Baring his arms for the fight, Chen Fan shouted, "The General-in Chief is loyal and protects the state! It is the Yellow Gates who are in rebellion! How can anyone say that the Dou clan is at fault?" Wang Fu came out to face him. He heard what Chen Fan said and objected, "When our late ruler had barely left this world, and even his tomb was not completed, what merit had Dou Wu achieved that his son and his nephews should be enfeoffed with three marquisates?
Then Duan Jiong set three ranks of halberds, swordsmen and spearmen, flanked by crossbows, with light cavalry on each wing. He exhorted his officers and men, "Now we are several thousand li from home. If we advance, everything is won. If we retreat, all of us will die. Let each give his utmost to share in a glorious name."
In the summer, in the sixth month, Liu Kang, son of Liu Li the King of Hejian, was enfeoffed as King of Ji'nan so that he might maintain the sacrifices of the Xiaoren Emperor.
Before this, Lü Bu had urged Wang Yun to kill all Dong Zhuo's followers, but Wang Yun answered him, "I can't do that; they have done nothing wrong."
Yet now you extend consideration to Dong Zhuo and refrain from punishing him. This is where you will lose and destroy the authority of the law."
The whole of Liang Ji's property was confiscated, and the local county offices sold off his goods. Altogether they raised three thousand million cash, which was paid into the official treasury. The annual taxation from the empire [for that year] was reduced by half, and all Liang Ji's parks and pleasure-grounds were divided for the benefit of the poor.
On the other hand, should I appear to distrust him he will certainly become angry and will decide against us."
Yuan Shao and the Administrator of Henei, Wang Kuang, camped in Henei, while the Governor of Ji province, Han Fu, stayed at Ye to attend to supplies.2 Kong Zhou, Inspector of Yu province, camped in Yingchuan. Liu Dai the Inspector of Yan province, Zhang Miao the Administrator of Chenliu, Zhang Miao's younger brother Zhang Chao the Administrator of Guangling, Qiao Mao the Administrator of Dong commandery, Yuan Yi the Administrator of Shanyang, Bao Xin the Chancellor of Jibei; with Cao Cao all camped at Suanzao.3 The General of the Rear Yuan Shu camped at Luyang.4 Each division contained several ten thousand men.
As a result of this, the Eastern Qiang were completely pacified.
Liu Bei followed Lu Su's advice, and he went forward to stay at Fankou in E county.
Again, members of the family of the Empress Song, though quite without guilt, have their bones abandoned and their bodies scattered abroad, and have not been granted proper burial. To give peace to their wandering ghosts, you [151] should give orders that their remains may be gathered and put to rights.
Tao Qian, Inspector of Xu province, recommended Zhu Jun as Acting General of Chariots and Cavalry, and sent three thousand trained men to help him, while other provinces and commanderies also sent troops.
When Gongsun Du took up his post, he punished by law and wiped out more than a hundred of the great and famous families in the commandery,and the whole territory trembled for fear. Then he attacked Gaogouli in the east, and in the west he attacked the Wuhuan.Gongsun Du spoke to those closest to him, Liu Yi, Yang Yi and some others and said, "The reign of Han is coming to its end. I ask you to join me in making plans for a kingdom."
In the ninth month on the day guiyou [27 Sep], Dong Zhuo called a great assembly of officials. He raised his head and said, "The emperor is ignorant and weak. He is not capable of maintaining the imperial temples nor acting as master of the empire.
Before this, Sun Jian had married a woman of the Wu clan from Qiantang, and they had four sons, Ce, Quan, Yi and Kuang, and one daughter.
On the day gengchen [2 Apr] he had Wu Qiong and Zhou Bi arrested and beheaded.
Sun Ce entered Qu'a and gave rewards to his troops. He made generous proclamation through all the counties [of Wu], "When any fellow-countryman or former supporter of Liu Yao and Zhai Rong comes to surrender, no questions will be asked. Of those who volunteer to join the army, each man who goes will satisfy the tax and labour requirements of his household. Those who do not wish to go will not be forced."
As Chen Gui left to take up his post, he sent in a report saying, "I have heard that when the courses of the sky are out of order,one should promote an ordinary gentleman to become chancellor; and when the barbarians fail to show proper respect, one may raise a common soldier to command.
Dong Cheng and Yang Feng now pretended to make peace with Li Jue and the others, but they sent secretly to Hedong to call the former leaders of the Bobo bandits Li Le, Han Xian and Hu Cai, and the Worthy King of the West of the Southern Xiongnu, Qubei. Arriving with troops of several thousand horsemen, they joined Dong Cheng and Yang Feng to attack Li Jue and his fellows, completely defeated them, and killed several thousand.
heguest may be as secure as Mount Tai, but the position of the ruler isunstable as a pile of eggs.
Sun Quan occupies the east of the Yangzi, and three of his family have held power there already.The terrain is difficult to approach, its people are loyal, and he has worthy and able men in his service. You may ally with him for mutual support, but you cannot make plans against him.
This letter is to remind us that if we attack them before they have surrounded the city, we shall reduce their early strength and raise the morale of our own troops. Then we can hold out."
It would be best to set our position some distance from the river to entice them over. When they are half-way across, we can attack them. By this means, Liu Bei can be defeated.
Now if I can have five thousand cavalry and ten thousand foot soldiers, with three thousand carts [for the supply train], then in three winters and two summers I shall crush them and settle them for good. There need be no concern the expenses will go beyond 5,400 million cash.
Furthermore,the man who [254] controls the army outside should not be privy todecisions taken at the inner council."
They marched to Yi, and Guo Jia said, "In war, speed like a spirit is the best.
Those responsible hoped he would renege on his previous arguments, so he was asked supplementary questions upon other topics.
The emperor had it in mind to make a great levy of troops, and he asked the opinion of Cheng Bao of Hanzhong, the Reporting Officer from Yi province .Cheng Bao replied: "The seven clans of Banshun have been good allies of the empire since the time of the Qin dynasty, and for this reason they have been exempt from tribute and taxes.
Before this, Wang Song of Yuyang had occupied Zhuo command ery. Liu Fang, a man of that commandery, now persuaded him tooffer his territory to Cao Cao. Cao Cao appointed Liu Fang Adviserto the Army of the Excellency of Works.
Yuan Shao's transports were approaching Guandu with severalthousand waggons of grain. Xun You said to Cao Cao, "His suppliesare on the way. Their commander Han Meng is brave, but he tendsto underestimate his enemies. If we attack him he will bedestroyed."
Jiang Gong and his two younger brothers, Jiang Zhonghai and Jiang Jijiang, were celebrated for their filial affection and their personal friendship.They would sleep under the same coverlet, and none of them would accept invitations to office.
You and Zijing [Lu Su] and Lord Cheng [Pu] go out in the van, and I shall continue to send you men and further supplies.
In the winter, in the tenth month on the day renyin [6 Nov], the emperor made a progress to the south.
You are an imperial servant and should share our hatred. But you hold a private affection, and so you mourn him.
In the spring, in the first month on the day jiazi [25 Feb], the emperor took the Cap of Manhood.1 There was an amnesty for the empire, but the men of Faction were excluded from its benefits.
Before this, when Liu Yu was intending to send a messenger to take a report to Chang'an, he found it difficult to decide on the right man. Everyone said, "Tian Chou of Youbeiping is only twenty-two, but although he is young he is remarkably able."
Cao Ren stationed the General of the Left Yu Jin with the General Who Supports Righteousness Pang De and others in camps north of Fan.
Kong Rong said, "I am the one who took the fugitive into our household. I should be punished."
6: 177 AD
How can you abandon loyalty and follow evil, and so bring mother and son both to die?
Dong Zhuo had false accusation made that the Minister of the Guards Zhang Wen had been in contact with Yuan Shu.In the winter, in the tenth month on the day renxu [5 Nov] Zhang Wen was flogged to death in the market-place to fulfil the prophecy.
Zhang Ji received and cared forthe refugees, and restored the county cities. The people loved him.
In the winter, in the tenth month on the day guichou, first of the month [9 Nov], there was an eclipse of the sun.
This, laughed Tian Chou, "is something you just don't understand."
Li Ying replied, "If there are problems in affairs, one does not make excuses, and if one is at fault, one does not seek to evade punishment. That is the proper conduct of a minister.
Meng Tuo of [You]fufeng, Inspector of Liang province, sent his Assistant Officer Ren She with five hundred men from Dunhuang to join the Wu and Ji Colonel Cao Kuan and the Chief Clerk of the Western Regions Zhang Yan, with troops from Yanqi, Qiuzi, and Nearer and Further Jushi, altogether more than thirty thousand men, to punish Shule [for turning against Han].They attacked the city of Zhenzhong, but after more than forty days they failed to capture it, and so they retreated.
When Sun Quan heard there was trouble, he turned back fromJiaoqiu. When he arrived in Danyang, he destroyed the remnantsof Gui Lan's and Dai Yuan's following
After this, however, he began to trust bad men and give themoffice. He had excessive ambition and extravagant faults, and so hisreputation declined.
"In former times, the Chancellor Shentu Jia summoned Deng Tong, and the Prefect of Luoyang Dong Xuan humiliated a princess. Yet Emperor Wen accepted it, and Emperor Guangwu actually gave a reward. I have never heard that those two ministers were in any danger of execution.
When the brothers first began to fight one another, theyhad no idea they might be making an opening for anyone else: theythought they could decide the empire between themselves
All these points are signs of danger in war, yet Cao Cao hastens blindly forwards.
Cao Cao would not listen, and still wanted him to accept.This was repeated four times, but still Tian Chou refused.
Mmany of the fighting men of the empire were planning to rebel against Dong Zhuo. Yuan Shao was in Bohai, but Han Fu, Governor of Ji province, sent Assistant Officers into the command-ery to keep him under control. Yuan Shao could make no move.
He beat a drum to lead the men in attack, and the battle waswon.
So they chose out Mao Rong of Chenliu, a most persuasive talker, and sent him to ride quickly after him.Mao Rong caught up with Xu Zhi on the road.
I am afraid the enemy have a great army, said Cao Cao, "and Xu Huang's force is in difficulty."
When Lu Su passed by Xunyanghe spoke with him, and was very surprised, exclaiming, "You arequite brilliant, no longer that A-Meng from Wu!" "When gentlemen have been separated as little as three days,"replied Lü Meng, "they still should rub their eyes when they meetagain [to look carefully how each has changed]. Why, elder brother,did you take so long to notice?" Lu Su then paid his respects to Lü Meng's mother, sworefriendship, and went on his way.
If I leave now he will certainly be pleased, and since he will hope I maynegotiate a good alliance for him outside he will treat my wife andchildren kindly.
Sun Jian came forward and whispered to Zhang Wen, "Dong Zhuo has no concern that he may be punished, so he acts proud and talks big. Because he failed to respond to your summons in time, you should execute him according to military law."
Dong Cheng, former retainer of Niu Fu, became General Who Gives Tranquillity and Collects the Empire.
Cao Cao said, "You have raised loyal troops to destroy cruelty and disorder, and a great army is already gathered. Why do you hesitate?
Sun Quan stayed at Hefei for more than ten days, but the city resisted all assaults and he was finally obliged to withdraw.
News of his exploit came to Cao Cao's army, but Cao Cao justlaughed and said, "It is not just a matter of getting in. He has yet tocome out again!"
Cao Cao, however, took the widow of Zhang Ji as a concubineand Zhang Xiu was extremely angry.
If you stay here in Luoyang, it will not be easy to managematters. The only thing to do is shift the emperor to Xu city.
Later he encouraged me to cede territory to Xuande [Liu Bei], but this was his only weakness, and not enough to discount his two fine actions.
Li Fu broke his staff of authority, tied it at the side of his horseand put on a flat-topped cap. Taking three horsemen with him, hewent by night towards Ye. Styling himself [327] a Chief Controller,he passed through the north of the siege, following signs towardsthe east. Every so often he would find fault with officers and menon sentry duty and punish them accordingly,
"Our men have come to join us because our cause is just, but if we hesitate and delay we shall disappoint the hopes of the empire, and I would be ashamed for you."
"If Mao Jie has indeed spoken against his lord," answered He Xia, "then his body should be exposed in the market-place or at court. If he has not abused you, then those who have informed against him made false accusations of a great minister and sought to deceive their master. I cannot feel at ease unless there is a proper investigation."
Later, Cheng Pucame to admire Zhou Yu, obeyed him of his own accord, andbecame a close friend. He would say to others that, "To be withZhou Gongjin is like drinking strong wine without water. You aredrunk before you realise it."
Gui Lan went in to take over the commandery offices, and hewanted to compel Sun Yi's widow, a woman of the Xu clan, [336]to marry him.
The Minister of the Guards Dong Zhong, Marquis of Tiao, was appointed General of Agile Cavalry.
"Now the officers of this province, Pang Xi, Li Yi and theircolleagues, are proud of their past achievements, arrogant andboastful. You cannot rely upon them.
Xun Shuang and the others all feared Dong Zhuo's cruelty and none dared refuse.
The men's confidence was doubled,
"My father Ji," replied Chen Qun, "was pointing out that whenHan did away with the punishment of mutilation they increased it inflogging.41 The idea began with love and pity, but it actually killedmore people. This is a case where 'the [459] name is light but thereality heavy.' The name is light, so it is easy to offend; as thereality is heavy, it harms people.
Xun You was very quiet, but he was wise and prudent. He had always followed Duke Cao of WEI on his campaigns, and made plans with him in his tent, but no-one, not even his sons and nephews, ever knew what was said.
Before this, Sun Quan had said to Lü Meng, "Now that you have anofficial position, you must study."
I have no thought for my own interests, and no personal enmity for Dong Zhuo. "Yet you now pay attention to slander,and for no reason at all you are suspicious of me!"
His officers urged that he attack WhiteTiger Yan and his allies first,
Please remember this, and do not turn against me."
The Dianna Qiang raided Wuwei, Zhangye and Jiuquan.
Xun Yu replied, "The Administrator of Xiping, Du Ji of Jing zhao, is courageous enough to cope with danger and wise enough todeal with any situation."
but in the sixth month the Administrator of Nanyang, Qin Jie, attacked him and killed him.
Chen Fan had sought to cede this position to the Minister of Ceremonies Hu Guang, to the Consultant Wang Chang, or to Li Ying, who was at that time a convict under reduced sentence. The emperor would not allow this.
Dou Wu memorialised that the Prefect of the Yellow Gates Wei Biao be dismissed, to be replaced by the Attendant of the Yellow Gates Shan Bing, [a eunuch] who was his own personal supporter. He had Shan Bing memorialise for the arrest of Zheng Li, Master of Writing at the Palace of Prolonged Joy, and Zheng Li was sent to the Northern Prison [of the Yellow Gates].
At that time neither Liunor Xiang were willing to retreat, for they knew that the first toabandon the field would lose everything.
The Great Seal of State had been lost but all the other seals were recovered.
"The Attendant of the Yellow Gates Zhao Jin, and that great rascal Zhang Fan and his people, all acted with cruelty and greed, but curried favour with your attendants.
At this time Guan Yu [in Jing province] was growing stronger. Jin Yi of Jingzhao, realising the Han emperor was in danger of being deposed, arranged a plot with the Minister Steward Geng Ji, the Director of Justice Wei Huang,28 the Court Physician Ji Ben, and with Ji Ben's sons Miao and Mu. They planned to kill Wang Bi, take control of the emperor as a means to turn against WEI, then call Guan Yu to bring help from the south.
Now the world is at peace, yet Liu Tao casts a slur upon your sage-like government and takes it upon himself to speak heresy and evil.
Jiang Gan of Jiujiang was the finest debater between the Yangzi andthe Huai,
At one time Xu Shao became Officer of Merit in his commandery, and when the local officers heard about it they became most careful and diligent in their conduct.
Yang Xuan sent in a memorial to defend himself, but Zhao Kai had factional support, and so Yang Xuan was summonsed with a cage cart. He was held strictly isolated and in close detention, without any means by which he might put his own case. Then he bit his arm until the blood ran and wrote a statement on his clothing, giving all the circumstances of his defeat of the rebels and the manner in which Zhao Kai [166] had borne false witness. He arranged for one of his relatives to go to the palace in secret and present the document.
I guarantee Gongji can hold out [here] for ten days."
By precedent, a supernumerary empress should not remain in the capital district. Weask that she be required to transfer residence to her own state."
"Should I be destroyed, moreover, the whole realm will be indanger. I am not prepared to give up my life for a meaninglessreputation.
With your uncanny arts of war, your clear understanding and the favour ofHeaven; how can you fail? "Your supplies may be low, but you are not in the straits of Chu nd Han between Rongyang and Chenggao.
The attendants went back and told Cao Cao, who was pleased, saying, "In anger not to change expression, in happiness not to lose control. Those are the truly difficult things."
"What I am doing now is demonstrating our authority by use of the law. When people have seen its foil rigour they will have proper appreciation of our grace and leniency.
Now that his children are inYuzhang, go and see to them. Tell of my feelings to his followers,and any that wish to do so may come back with you. Those that donot want to come, make them feel at peace for the time being. Andat the same time, find out how well Hua Ziyu [Hua Xin] ismanaging.
Officers and men were delighted, and they all went out to take part.
I and my family have received favour from the state for generations.I think little of my own person, but I regard the position which I hold as very important.Facing death, I present these comments, albeit they are less than respectful.
As a result of this incident, the eunuchs found several occasions for edicts to criticise and reprimand Zhu Mu.
but He Xia said [to his companions], "The reason I did not go to Benchu [Yuan Shao] was that I was avoiding an area where there would be fighting.
A generous ruler, however, will be broad-mindedand open-hearted, great enough to make allowance for weaknessesand to forgive misconduct. The first priority is to get rid of Cao Caoand destroy your father's enemy.
YuanShu came in person with five thousand horsemen to show his armsat the Huai, but Lü Bu's cavalry were north of the river, and theylaughed and jeered at them and then went back.
So he treated Xu You generously and behaved well to him, and Xu You submitted at once.
When he found out that Sun Jian had found the Great Seal of State, he held Sun Jian's wife hostage and took it from him.
In the autumn, in the seventh month, Zhang Xiu gathered his followers to make rebellion and they raided the commanderies and counties. The people of that time called them the Rice Rebels.
According to the requirements of ritual, he who succeeds another takes position as his son.Emperor Huan being thus in position to you as a father; how can you fail to treat the Dowager as your mother?
Li Jue sent Fan Chou, Guo Si and his elder brother's son Li Li to attack Ma Teng. Ma Teng was defeated and fled, and went back to Liang province.
Qiu Xiang of Chenliu was an upright and modest man, but no-one in his neighbourhood recognised his worth.
Wu Dao, an Investigator in Runan commandery, received imperial orders to arrest Fan Pang. He took the document and went to Zhengqiang, but then closed the gates of the post-house [where he was lodging], took himself to bed and wept. No-one in the county could understand what was wrong.
The Administrator of Taiyuan, Liu Zhi of Pingyuan, sent the commandery officer Wang Yun to arrest and punish him. In this case too the execution was carried out after an amnesty had been issued.
Later, Zhang Lu attacked and occupied Ba commandery. Thecourt was not strong enough to fight him, so he was given title asGeneral of the Household Who Maintains the [307] People in Peace, and was also appointed Administrator of Hanning.14 He sentup tribute, but that was all.
"Yuan Shao is slow and hesitant," observed Guo Jia. "He willnot come quickly.
The Colonel of Elite Cavalry Dou Wu became Colonel of the City Gates.
Later Zuo Yuan did feel a great resentment, and he collected a band of followers to avenge himself on the other students.
Duan Jiong had served on the frontier for more than ten years, and not once had he slept in a comfortable bed. He shared all the discomforts of his officers and men, and every one would willingly die for him. He had been successful on every campaign.
If I accepted this humiliating way of escape, I should always suffer the shame of the accusation. Alive, I shall appear as a bad official; dead, I will be a miserable ghost.
The General of the Household Yang Mi, however, protested fiercely, and Guo Si stopped.
At this, the emperor shook with rage. He sent orders to the commanderies and kingdoms that they should arrest all men of Faction, and he ordered proclamation made to all the empire so that his wrath might be known and the cause of his anger understood.
Liang Ji did become suspicious of Shan Chao and his fellows, and in the eighth month, on the day dingchou [9 Sep] he sent the Palace Attendant of the Yellow Gates Zhang Yun to take up residence in the private apartments and keepwatch against any trouble.
Dong Zhuo now sent his Administrator of Dong commandery, Hu Zhen,with five thousand horsemen and foot-soldiers to attack Sun Jian. Lü Bu was in command of the cavalry.
Because Liu Zhang was dull and weak, Zhang Lu refused to accepthis orders, but attacked his Senior Major Zhang Xiu, killed him and took over his troops.
"What of your aged mother?" asked Cao Cao.
Sun Jian replied, "Dong Zhuo opposes Heaven and defies the law. Until I have killed you and all your clan, and shown your heads to the four seas, I shall not be able to die in peace. How can there be alliance with you?"
Liu Bei set his base at You[jiang]kou, andchanged the name to Gongan.
The best plan is go south against Jing province and wait forsomething to happen. When things have changed, we can attackthem, and the whole affair may be settled in a single blow." "Excellent!" said Cao Cao, and in the fifth month, leaving hiscommander Jia Xin in camp at Liyang, he returned to Xu city. [318]
"Now!" said Cao Cao, and they leapt on their horses.
The former Administrator of Taiyuan Liu Zhi, and the former Administrator of Nanyang Cheng Jin, arrested and executed them. Although it may be claimed that the action took place after an amnesty, so the men should not have been put to death, the essential point is that these officers had hearts which were sincerely concerned with the elimination of evil. From your majesty's point of view, what cause is there for anger?
Before this, Emperor Ling had always been very fond of literary scholarship,and had himself composed a "Discussion of the Emperor [Fu] Xi" in fifty sections. He chose scholars skilled in composition, particularly rhapsodies, and had them attend at the Gate of the Vast Capital. Later, he also gathered experts in the calligraphy of [govern ment documents written on] tablets one foot long, official scripts and the Bird Seal style. Altogether, there were now several score [of these litterateurs and calligraphers].
Du Ji said to Wei Gu and Fan Xian, "The people of Hedonglook up to the Wei and Fan families, and I rely upon you entirely formy administration. T
In the intercalary [fifth] month the Administrator of Yongchang Cao Luan sent in a letter which argued:"Among the men of Faction, some are elders and seniors of utmost virtue, and others are active gentlemen of worth and courage. All are suitable to act as ministers to the royal house and as assistants in the great councils of state."Yet these people have suffered long proscription, and they remain disgraced in dust and mud.
"From now on, the system of ritual observances should follow the ancient canon; this will form an appropriate response to the strange phenomena of wind, thunder and other ominous signs.
King Qiao asked Qian Zhao, "Once before, Lord Yuan said thathe held command from the Son of Heaven to appoint me Shanyu.Now Lord Cao is saying that he will tell the Son of Heaven andhave me made Shanyu properly. And besides this, there is an envoywith insignia from Liaodong.
The emperor asked the Regular Attendant Lu Qiang what hethought of the proposal, and Lu Qiang replied, "The proscription has been maintained for a long time and the people [affected by it] have been made angry and resentful. Unless they are given a pardon, they could easily join Zhang Jue. The rebellion would become very much more serious and it would be too late to do anything about it.
Taishi Ci, from the same commandery as Liu Yao, had come to him from Donglai. As Sun Ce was approaching, someone suggested Taishi Ci be given a senior command,
Yuan Shao himself took command against Gongsun Zan, and they fought twenty li south of Jie Bridge.
Add the facts that military affairs are not yet resolved, while in every part of the world there are scattered and homeless refugees, then this is a time that the ruler should bear an anxious heart and a care- worn countenance, sitting up [into thesmall hours] and waiting on the developments each day may bring.How can it be right to raise the banners and display the panoply of war, exciting the heart with the show of horses and chariots?
Liu Bei heard of the situation. He came himself from SHU to Gongan, and he sent Guan Yu to fight for the three commanderies.
Snatching up his sword, Dong Zhuo shouted at Yuan Shao, "You silly fool, how dare you defy me!
In the sixth month on the day bingzi [6 Jul] an edict appointed Handan Shang of Chenliu as Inspector of Yong province, to administer the new region.
The Administrator of Wuyuan Wang Zhi, however, a younger brother of Wang Fu, reported that Cai Yong had insulted the court, and Cai Yong fled to the Yangzi and the sea. He remained [in exile from the capital] for twelve years.Dong Zhuo knew his reputation and summoned him, but Cai Yong pleaded sick and would not come.
At the time of Dong Zhuo's death Cai Yong, General of the Household on the Left and Marquis of Gaoyang,was sitting with Wang Yun. When he heard the news, he gasped in fright.
The emperor was extremely angry. He summoned Cheng Jin and Liu Zhi and sent them both to jail.
In the summer, in the fifth month on the day guiwei [?] the Ministerof the Guards Ma Teng was executed and all his family destroyed.
In the sixth month on the day xinhai [7 Jul] the Dowager Dong died suddenly from grief and fear.
The excellencies, ministers and men of lower rank were all frightened and confused. None dared speak against him.
Dong Zhuo captured some soldiers from the east of the mountains. He took lard and daubed it on a dozen rolls of [44] cloth, then bound the cloth to their bodies and set light to them, beginning at the feet and going up.
Only when the Tang group were dead, and an edict of amnesty was issued, did Zhao Qi venture to emerge from hiding.
Yuan Shao was north of the Yellow River, and the men of hisarmy ate mulberries,
When the memorial came in, the Masters of Writing in the Imperial Secretariat summoned the clerks in Yang Bing's office and reprimanded them, "In the organisation of government and the demarcations of responsibility, each has its own areas of concern.
yet a ruler of royal power can be appealed to for justice.I ask you to speak on their behalf."
When Liang Ji heard about this, he had the authorities in Luoyang arrest Chen Shou and examine him by torture. Chen Shou died in jail.
Sun Shao the son of Sun He, seventeen years old, had collected theremnant of Sun He's forces to hold camp at Jing city.
Sun Ce heard of all this, and he wrote to Yuan Shu,16 "When Cheng Tang attacked Jie, he could claim that 'The rulers of Xia have many crimes.' When King Wu raised an army against Zhou, he could claim that 'Yin has many faults.' These two masters had the powerof sages, but if at that time [the established rulers] had not lost the Way of right action, there would have been no justification for taking them over.
He Jin now called Dong Zhuo to bring his troops to the capital district.
Advancing by land and water, Liu Bei and Zhou Yu pursued Cao Cao into Nan commandery.
The only reason the people of the four provinces obey you now is on accoount of your military strength, for they have not yet seen the true grace of your government. If you go away on campaign in the south, then Yuan Shang will use the resources of the Wuhuan to gather followers prepared to die for him. Once the northern barbarians are on the move, then the Chinese and the eastern barbarians will join them. This would give Tadun ideas and allow him to plan aggression. And if that happens I fear both Qing and Ji provinces will be lost to us.
The Intendant of Henan, Li Ying, sent in a memorial on his wrongdoing.
All bowed their heads and wept.
Sun Lang, a man of Luhun, made rebellion. He killed the Registrarof the county and went south to join Guan Yu.
Cao Cao said to Jia Xu, "ChengYu is braver than Meng Ben or Xia Yu."
Besides, Guo Duo has taken the senior ministers and holds them hostage. He acts like this and you still want to help him?"
Tossing the cup aside, he got up and went out to the cage cart.
A great many officials and people of the western provinces, and the local garrison commanders, had sought justice on behalf of Duan Jiong, the former Protector of the Qiang.About this time, the Dianna Qiang were growing steadily more powerful, and Liang province was almost lost.So Duan Jiong was once more appointed Protector.
Fully confident of their position, therefore, the eunuchs built great houses for themselves, rivalling the imperial palace.
Then Sun Jian died. Sun Ce was seventeen, and he went back for the burial at Qu'a, and from there he moved across the Yangzi to settle in Jiangdu. He made friends there with fighting men, and maintained his aim of revenge [for his father's death from Huang Zu].
The men from the north, moreover, are not trained to fight in river country, while the people of Jing province who turn to Cao Cao are doing so because they are compelled by military force, not because they want to.
He turned to tell one of his Attendants of the Yellow Gates that the recommendation [sent in by the chief officials] was approved.Li Yun and Du Zhong both died in jail.As a result of this incident, the influence of the emperor's personal favourites became all the greater.
Then, while Cao Cao was facing Yuan Shao and had noopportunity to help him,
In the fifth month the Minister of Ceremonies Hu Guang became Excellency over theMasses.
Now, however, when the imperial house is weak and in decline, you have no intention to offer support and assist ance. You seek only to seize opportunity, you possess an inordinate ambition, and you kill good and loyal men to establish your evil power.
Huan Dian became an Imperial Clerk. The eunuchs were uneasy at his appointment.
The best thing to do is take Guan Yu and seize all the Long River [the Yangzi]. You would extend the state even further [than if you took Xu province], and those lands can easily be defended.
I ask your majesty to relax the prohibitions against light or shaved coinage and put this debate about currency behind you.Listen to the songs of the people, ask an old man by the roadside about his troubles,watch the bright patterns of the sun, the moon and the stars, and take note of changes in the divisions of the hills and the currents of the rivers.The minds of the people of the empire, and the great affairs of state, will all appear clearly [in these signs] and one should never neglect them or doubt them.
Only Qian Zhao made sacrifice and wept for grief. Cao Cao admired his loyalty, and recommended him as Abundant Talent.
Wang Fu had pity on him, changed his attitude, and had all the prisoners released from their fetters.
I have been in this post for ten days already, and personally I was rather worried I might be held at fault for the delay. I hardly expected to be criticised for acting too quickly against a criminal.
Guan Yu and Zhang Fei were jealous, but Liu Bei explained to them: "I need Kongming like a fish needs water.
Liu Zhang added to Liu Bei's troops and supplied himgenerously with provisions and equipment. Then he sent him toattack Zhang Lu and gave orders that he should also take [433]command of the army already at Boshui.
Fan Fang did lead his cavalry away, but before he had rejoined Gongsun Zan, Gongsun Zan had been defeated.
In the winter, in the tenth month on the day bingchen [26 Nov], the emperor went hunting at the Guangcheng Park, and then proceeded to visit the Hangu Pass and the Shanglin Park.
Guo Tai and Fu Rong each paid him a visit, sending in their cards, and he lodged with them.
"Cruel and slanderous officials have spread broad nets for me, and they encourage one another against us. It is as if they pursued an enemy.
In the spring, in the first month on the day xinchou there was an amnesty for the empire.
but Zhang Zhao, who was in attendance at this time, objected that, "The people in Wu are unsettled. If the army leaves I fear there will surely be rebellion."
All Yuan Shao's men beat their breasts and wept and said, "IfTian Feng had been here we would never have suffered such adefeat."
Sun Ce brought histroops and defeated them all.
Before this, Cai Yong had been banished to Shuofang, but soon afterwards there was an amnesty and he was able to return.
Then he called out loud, "Chen Fan and Dou Wu have sent in a memorial telling the Dowager to depose the emperor. This is high treason!"
When I first arrived in the province I sent in reports for the impeachment of Sun Jun, Li Xi and Zhang Bing, and when I went on campaign to the south I again sent in reports against Guo Hong and Zhao Xi, setting out their errors and wrongdoing.On the evidence presented, they were duly executed.
There have lately been reports that the Auspicious Grain and the Zhi Plant have appeared,and also a yellow dragon.
When he captured Yu Jin and the other generals, Guan Yu had also obtained several ten thousand men and horses, and his supplies of food were running low. Without asking permission, he seized Sun Quan's grain store at Xiangguan. When Sun Quan heard about it, he raised troops for a surprise attack on Guan Yu.
"Once you have received royal authority [by sending tribute to the emperor], Mengde [Cao Cao] and Jingsheng [Liu Biao] will certainly send help."
Sun Ce entrusted his mother and younger brothers to Zhang Hong of Guangling and went straight to Shouchun to see Yuan Shu.
Fu Xie's son Fu Gan, thirteen years old, said to his father, "The nation is in confusion and disorder, and that is why you have never received your true deserts from the court.
The men of their two armies met one another, drinking and making merry formore than a hundred days.
Then he heard that he had fled, and he was angry and said,"Chong, unless you run as far south as the Yue tribes or as far northas the Hu barbarians, you will never escape me!" When he captured Shequan Wei Chong was taken alive. "Butsuch ability!" said Cao Cao. He loosed his bonds and appointed himAdministrator of Henei, with responsibility for the north of theYellow River.
Then Liu Biao became very ill, and Liu Qi returned to attend his sick-bed.
In the winter, in the tenth month Cao Cao was appointed Governor of Yan province.
Cao Zhi's wife wore embroidered clothing, and Cao Caoclimbed a tower and saw her. Because she had disobeyed the sumptuary regulations she was sent back to her home and allowed tocommit suicide.
[Cao Cao] also wanted to have him rank with the Three Excellencies but Xun Yu sent Xun You to make it clear that he would refuse such an honour. After more than ten attempts, Cao Cao gave up the idea.
His true favourites were merchants and common fellows, whom he treated like brothers and accepted as relatives by marriage. Such men behaved as bullies, and the people hated them.
Because Cao Cao was in the north, however, Sun Quan felt that heneeded all the fighting men he could find, so he did not follow theiradvice.
Wen Ping of Nanyang, a high military officer in Jing province, had kept his camp apart outside. As Liu Zong went to surrender he called Wen Ping to join him,
"I myself heard you call Zhang of Chenliu [Zhang Miao] your elder brother, so my commandery leader [Zhang Chao] must be your younger brother. You were supposed to be allies, eliminating evil and preserving the state from harm. How could you hold back your forces and stand idle as another man was destroyed?
So great are the miseries of the people that some would sell their own heads for the sake of a reward, fathers and brothers help one another to injure their bodies [in order to avoid conscription], and wives and children are driven in distress from their homes.
In the twelfth month on the day jiayin [9 Jan 178] the Minister of Ceremonies Meng Yu of Henan became Grand Commandant.
Bing Yuan travelled far in search of learning, and after eight or nine years he was due to go home. Because he did not drink wine, his teachers and school fellows prepared only rice and meat for the farewell party.Bing Yuan said, "I used to drink wine, but I stopped because it confused my thoughts and prevented me from working.
When youcome to the Yan Crossing, pretend to send men across the riveragainst his rear. Yuan Shao will certainly turn west to deal withthem.
Cao Cao's father Cao Song was the adopted son of the Regular Attendant Cao Teng. There is no way to tell his family origins, although some said he was a member of the Xiahou clan.
On the day bingzi [16 Jul] the General of the Van Zhao Qian became Excellency over the Masses.
Of the men whom Dou Wu had recommended [in the memorial quotedabove], Zhu Yu was a man from Pei, Yuan Kang came from Bohai, Yang Qiao was from Kuaiji and Bian Shao was a man from Chenliu.
The Lieutenant-General Dong Xi and the Senior Major Ling Tong were together in the van, each leading a hundred volunteers in double armour.They boarded a great barge, charged the covered ships,
Leaving Guan Yu to hold Jing province, Zhuge Liang went with Zhang Fei and Zhao Yun to led troops upstream to seize Badong.
You are a turncoat," replied Shen Pei in a harsh voice. "I am aloyal minister. Even though I must die, I would never change placeswith you."
"Your majesty has risen from the rank of a feudal lord to inherit the supreme position. Even in an unimportant family one should take care of a myriad items of property, and sons and grandsons will be ashamed if they fail to maintain the achievement of the past.
The emperor accordingly condemned Xu Yu and Zhang Ji, and the men who had been summonsed to the capital on account of the false reports were now appointed as Consultants.
The [county] marquisates which had been awarded by favour to Shan Chao, Xu Huang and Tang Heng were now reduced to district fiefs, while those of their family who had shared the fiefs were stripped of their titles.
Yuan Shang besieged him tightly.Yuan Tan sent Xin Pi,younger brother of Xin Ping, to go to Cao Cao and ask for help.
"The people of Yi province are prosperous," replied Liu Bei, "and their territory is difficult to approach. Liu Zhang is weak, but he is well able to hold his place.
Someone spoke to Liu Zhang against Pang Xi, and Liu Zhangbecame suspicious of him.
Many argued that "The east of the mountains is not yet settled, while Han Xian and Yang Feng are relying on their good work and look upon any rivals with an arrogant air. We shall not be able to deal with them quickly."
Yuan Feng's cousin Yuan Hong was already a young man of strict principle. He studied while working on the land, and though Yuan Feng and Yuan Wei offered him food on many occasions, he would always refuse.
Thosewho offended the law were granted pardon three times before theywere punished,
I humbly beg to recall the times of Zhou and Qin, when the Rong and Di barbarians were the cause of harm.Since the time of the Restoration [of Later Han], the Qiang marauders have been extremely numerous. It has proved impossible to eliminate them, and even when they surrender, it is only to rebel once more.
[Then, however,] as I wielded the authority and spiritual power of the state, the Qiang bowed to the ground before us.The expenses we saved were more than a hundred million cash.
when the Xianlian were rebellious, Zhao Chongguo settled them inside the border. When the Jiandang troubled the frontier, Ma Yuan shifted them to the Three Adjuncts. The Qiang at first submitted, but they eventually rebelled, and they have been a problem ever since.All officials with foresight have been deeply concerned about this situation.
When Cao Cao reached Chenliu, he sold off family property to recruit five thousand soldiers.
I have met a time of disorder and I cannot fulfil my true ambition. I have taken his salary, so how can I seek to avoid his time of danger?
Even if Gonglu [Yuan Shu] does come, there will be nothing he can do.
Jianning 1: 168 AD 28 January 168 - 14 February 169
Pei Qian of Hedong was also treated with great courtesy by Liu Biao, but he said privately to Wang Can, son of Wang Chang, and to Sima Zhi of Henei, "Governor Liu lacks the ability to rule as a hegemon, but he compares himself to the Lord of the West. He cannot survive for long."
The best plan now is to stay in camp atthe Yan Crossing and send an advance guard towards Guandu. Ifthey manage to capture the place you will have time to join them,but if you go forward immediately and something goes wrong, noneof the army will be able to get back."
however, he browbeat and ridiculed him. Claiming that he wished to inspect the regalia, he borrowed the imperial [144] credentials and the Staff of Authority from Ma Midi, then kept them by force and refused to hand them back. He ordered a dozen of his men to bully Ma Midi so that he would be compelled to give him higher office.
Then Sun Ce led an attack on Zu Lang at Lingyang andcaptured him.
I reckon the main force from the north will arrive within ten days, and Cao Ren can hold out that long. Then we can coordinate our attacks and the enemy will certainly be defeated.
Liu Wangzhi's younger brother Yi said to him, "When Zhao [Jianzi] killed [Dou] Mingdu, Zhongni [Confucius] turned away.
In the winter, in the tenth month King Cao of WEI came to Luoyang.
On the day dingchou [25 Jan 168] the emperor died in the front section of the Hall of Virtuous Light.
Duan Jiong attacked and defeated the Western Qiang, and led his army forward in an exhaustive pursuit. They followed the enemy through mountains and valleys, and every day from spring into autumn they were engaged in combat. So the enemy were defeated and scattered. Altogether they killed 23,000 of them and took tens of thousands of prisoners.
Liu Bei appointed Zhuge Liang as General of the Household Master of the Army, and sent him to take charge of the threecommanderies Lingling, Guiyang and Changsha, and to levy sufficient taxes for the needs of the army. Lieutenant-General Zhao Yun held command as Administrator of Guiyang.
A messenger was sent to Chang'an with a Staff of Authority to appoint Zhang Wen as Grand Commandant.
Our family, however, has received imperial favour for generations, and although I must leave the inner apartments my heart yet holds great attachment to them. I wish to return once more to the forbidden palace, to gaze from afar one last time upon the countenance of her majesty the Dowager. Then I can go back to the mud of the ditches and die without regret."
"There are ten points where Yuan Shao is weak and you are hissuperior, so though Yuan Shao may be powerful he will never gainsuccess:
You have conquered Hanzhong, and Yi province is trembling. Send your troops against them, and their position will collapse.
The court has tried to get you to make peace, but the imperial orders have no effect. Now you want to shift the emperor to Huangbo- cheng, and I, an aging man, simply do not understand it.
In the eleventh month the Grand Commandant Liu Chong left office.The Minister Coachman Guo Xi of Fugou [in Chenliu] became Grand Commandant.
Then Jia Xu went, Zhang Xiu treated him with the courtesyowed by a son or grandson, and Duan Wei did indeed look after hisfamily well. [209]
An edict summoned Huangfu Gui to appointment as General on the Liao.
When the former Inspector of Liang province, Zhu Liang, was first appointed to that territory, he presented impeachments of many offenders, administrators and magistrates. At least half of them were dismissed and the effect could be seen within a very short time. He should be honoured and rewarded, so that able men and good work may be encouraged.If we change the appointed governors and administrators,dismissing the wicked and corrupt men; and if we also choose new emissaries and protectors for the Xiongnu, the Wuhuan and the Qiang,selecting both civil and military appointments with care and providing them with them clear instructions; and if we relieve the tax requirements and corvée services of the current year for Bing and Liang provinces, showing leniency and forgiveness to those who have run foul of the law, to clear everything away and make a new beginning.
and Cao Cao sent him on a secret mission to win overZhou Yu.
In the spring, in the first month Cao Cao's eldest son Pi was madeGeneral of the Household for All Purposes with subordinateofficials, to serve as Associate to the Imperial Chancellor.
In the spring, in the second month on the day wuwu [2 Apr] the Excellency over the Masses Chong Gao died.
Should I be arrogant enough to accept this fief,then even if I went there with my face hidden, it would still cause august Heaven to shake with anger, and disasters would flow down upon the people.Where could I seek refuge from that?"
Liu Pu and his colleagues were demoted to secondary marquisates. Yin Xun and the others also lost their ranks of nobility.
Zhao Yu as Administrator of Guangling and Wang Lang as Administrator of Kuaiji.
Several of Liu Zong's officers, including Kuai Yue the Administrator of Zhangling and Fu Xuan, Senior Clerk in the Departmentof the East, urged him to surrender to Cao Cao.They argued that "There are important principles for opposition and for obedience, and settled situations of strength and weakness.
Cao Cao invited Dong Zhao to sit with him and asked, "Now that Iam here, what plans should I make?" "You have raised loyal troops to punish cruelty and disorder,"replied Dong Zhao, "and you have come to pay court to the emperorand give help to the royal house. This is work worthy of the fivehegemons.
"The best policy now is to bring Jing province to join Cao Cao.He will certainly treat you with respect and favour, you will enjoyfortune and honour for a long time to come, and you will be able tohand it on to your descendants. This is the perfect plan."
The Chancellor of Beihai, Kong Rong, said to Liu Bei, "Yuan Gonglu, is he a man to care for the state? Can he ever forget his lineage?
Nonetheless, even as they swallowed one another up, those military leaders in provinces and commanderies still sought to justify themselves by reference to the honour of Han.
The Minister Coachman Deng Sheng of Hongnong became Grand Commandant.
To face north to Cao Cao [and honour himas ruler], I cannot do that."
Chen Gui was afraid that Xu and Yang [provinces, Lü Bu andYuan Shu] would form an alliance and cause unending trouble. Hewent to Lü Bu and said, "Lord Cao has received the Son of Heavenand is supporting the government of the state. You should join withhim to preserve the empire. B
Fan Yi had by this time already entered the county. Jin Yun received him, but set soldiers in ambush to kill him. Then he went back and prepared his troops to defend themselves in Fan.
The General-in-Chief Liang Ji had an old quarrel with Chen Gui, and he slandered him as a man who had harmed the dignity of the state, taken false credit for his achievements, and had actually given the Xiongnu no cause to fear him.So Chen Gui was recalled, and Chong Gao was made General on the Liao.
After that he established schools, and he chose for office only menof filial piety and brotherly love. He kept weapons in repair and wasfully prepared for war, and so Hedong had peace.
On one occasion Cui Yan's younger cousin Cui Lin discussed the scholars of Ji province with Chen Qun, and he praised Cui Yan as the best. Chen Qun, however, thought little of Cui Yan, because despite his wisdom he had not been able to save himself "
He also received the Nine Distinc tions: the Great Carriage and the War Carriage, one of each, withtwo Black Stallions; Clothes and Bonnets of Honour, with RedSlippers to match; Suspended Musical Instruments and the SixRows of Dancers; the Vermilion Door behind which to dwell; theInner Staircase by which to ascend; the Gentlemen Rapid as Tigers,three hundred men; the Ceremonial Axe and the Battle Axe, one ofeach; one Scarlet Bow with a hundred Scarlet Arrows, and tenBlack Bows with a thousand Black Arrows; one goblet of the BlackMillet Herb-Flavoured Liquor, with a Jade Libation-Cup to match.
"My uncle, my mother, and my younger brother are all inYuan's hands," answered Ju Shou. "I shall be obliged if you will killme quickly
Sun Quan brought Zhou Yu to discuss the matter with hismother the Lady Wu. Zhou Yu said, "In ancient times, when Chuwas first established as a vassal state [of the Zhou dynasty], it hadnot so much as a hundred li of territory.
Now the Dowager was frightened. Dismissing all the Regular Attendants and the Attendants of the Yellow Gates, she ordered them to return to their homes. There remained only a few family retainers who had been sent by He Jin to guard the inner apartments.
Zhu Jun and local commanders under the Inspector of Jing province, Xu Qiu, collected their forces and besieged the rebels. They attacked the place from the sixth month to the eighth, but without success.
Among all Heaven's people, Xing Yong is the first to appreciate the situation, observed Tian Chou.
Furthermore, you will be taking over from the weak andattacking the stupid, and what you seize by rebellion you may holdwith obedience. Men of the past have always respected this.
His junior officials all made strong objections, but Huang Fu replied, "Xu Xuan is a public menace. If I kill him today, though I may be executed for it tomorrow, I shall die content."
Many of Lü Bu's troops had acted cruelly, and Yuan Shao was concerned about it. Then Lü Bu asked to go back to Luoyang.
His officers are brave, but they are not as good as you; so despitethe fact that you were using beaten men you could fight and be sureto win."
The capital is a long way away and no-one heard their complaints. The people had nothing to live on and that is why they have gathered together as rebels."
He had the Palace Attendant Yang Qi raise up the curtains of the carriage, and the emperor said, "Soldiers, how dare you crowd our honourable person?"
From far and near and from every direction, six or seven thousand well-known scholars gathered together to accompany his funeral.
but the Consultant Li Xie said "Liu Xu proved incapable of fulfilling his duty as a vassal lord, and he injured and disgraced your sacred dynasty. He should not be returned to his kingdom."
The Minister of the Imperial Household Yang Ci became Excellency of Works.
Lu Bu came again from Dongmin, joined Chen Gong and led tenthousand men to come and fight. Cao Cao's soldiers were all out collecting the harvest, there were no more than a thousand men on the spot, and the camp was very lightly defended.
In the twelfth month, on the day jisi [16 Feb 185] there was an amnesty for the empire and the reign-title was changed [to Zhongping].
Lu Xun then arranged the eastern three commanderies into divisions and units,so that able-bodied men became soldiers and the weak were brought to fill vacancies in the registers of households. He obtained several ten thousand good soldiers,
"Yue Song has position as a senior attendant and Ren Zhi is in the privy secretariat, while Que Jian and Liang Gu have received quite inappropriate favours and enfeoffments."In these circumstances, the status of a proper official with a seal at his girdle is brought down to the level of these fellows from the fields and paddies. In their mouths are the words of Yao and Shun, and in their conduct they match the most distinguished men of the past, yet they are abandoned and cast aside to the ditches and the gutters, and are cared for no more.
Zhang Liao became angry and said, "Victory or defeat depend on this one battle.
Wu Shu was later appointed Inspector of Jing province.When he went on that occasion to make his farewells to Liang Ji, Liang Ji gave him wine which had been poisoned. Wu Shu went out, and then he died in his carriage.
In the eighth month on the day jiachen [27 Sep] the emperor went to Xinfeng.
Jian'an 7: 202 AD
Liu Bei was at Fankou, and every day he sent patrols along the river to watch for Sun Quan's army.
When Fa Zheng arrived in Jing province he put his plan to Liu Beiin a private conversation: "With your courage and skill you can takeadvantage of Governor Liu's lack of energy. Zhang Song is legs andarms to that province, and he will be like an echo to you within thecourt. You can take Yi province as easily as you turn your hand."
On this one occasion the King of Hanzhong is honouring the house of Han, and he rewards a man for his achievement, why should you believe that his affection for you is no different to that which he holds for others?
Yuan Shao said to Pang Ji, "The people of Ji province haveheard my army is defeated and they should all remember [how theymisled] me. My Attendant Officer Tian Feng was the only one whodid not agree, but advised me not to go. I am still ashamed to facehim."
Jian'an 2: 197 AD
They were men of upright character and classical accomplishment, famous among the people of that time, and all the empire mourned them.
My Registrar, Yang Hui, shall act as my Cheng Ying."
Other clerks in the offices tried to persuade Huangfu Gui to offer bribes and ask forgiveness, but Huangfu Gui swore that he would do no such thing.He was taken before the Minister of Justice, and on the ground that the disturbances [in the west] were still continuing he was sentenced to convict service in the Enclosure of the Left.
Yang Qiu had men put earth into Wang Meng's mouth to silence him, and had him beaten with both a bamboo and with a wooden cudgel. Wang Fu and his sons all died from the beating. Duan Jiong committed suicide.
Yuan Shu wanted to appoint Jin Shang, former Inspector ofYan province, as his Grand Commandant, but Jin Shang would notaccept. He tried to run away and Yuan Shu killed him.
Then Gongsun Zan picked a few hundred of his best men, took advantage of the wind to set a fire, and charged through the enemy lines. Liu Yu's force disintegrated,
Now the enemies of our state are greater than the Xiongnu and there is still no sign of peace.
Cao Cao summoned He Kui of Chen state to appointment as aSenior Clerk, and asked him about Yuan Shu. "If a man seeks thesupport of Heaven," replied He Kui, "he must follow Heaven's will.If he wishes to receive the assistance of men, he must be worthy oftheir trust.
Then Cao Cao did agree upon a day for battle. He first sent out lighttroops to skirmish, and when they had fought for a time he let loosehis Tiger Cavalry to attack the enemy on both flanks and completelydefeated them. They took the heads of Cheng Yi, Li Kan and several others.
Sun Jian went forward to Dagu, ninety li from Luoyang.
In the eighth month on the day wuchen [28 Sep] it was ordered for the first time that those people in the commanderies and kingdoms who owned farmland should pay a tax in cash on each mu at the time of the harvest.
You hold provinces and commanderies, and you should join all your forces to save the royal house. Instead, you have made plans of rebellion, and you seek to involve me in your shameful dealings!"
At first, none dared oppose the plan, but then the Registrar Yan Xiang came forward and said, "In earlier times the Zhou accumul ated virtue and added good works from Hou Ji to King Wen.
In the spring, in the third month, an imperial edict ordered that Confucian scholars should produce a correct edition of the Five Classics. The Consultant Cai Yong was commissioned to write the text in the three scripts of Old Style, Seal and Clerical Style. They were then to be carved upon stone, and the stele set up outside the gate of the Imperial University.It was intended that both senior scholars and junior students should accept these texts as authoritative.
Sun Ce planned to take Kuaiji. White Tiger Yan and other leadersof Wu commandery were camped in various positions, each withover ten thousand men.
Meng Min of Julu came as a migrant to Taiyuan. When a pot he was carrying on his back fell to the ground, he did not turn his head to look but simply walked away.
You will only upset him and make his illness worse.This is not the way to show filial respect."
Next morning Mao Rong killed a chicken for the meal, and Guo Tai thought it was for him. Mao Rong, however, took half the bird to feed his mother and put the other half away into storage. He himself brought some vegetables to put into the dish to share with his guest.
Nanlou of Shanggu, a chieftain of the Wuhuan, had a following of more than nine thousand luo groups. Qiuliju of Liaoxi had a following of five thousand groups. Both men took title as kings.
"You shouldn't do that," said Liu Bei. "Do you not recall howLü Bu treated Ding Jianyang [Ding Yuan] and the Grand MasterDong [Zhuo]?"
The Controller of the Army Du Xi and Xiahou Yuan's Major Guo Huai of Taiyuan collected the scattered troops and issued a statement to all the army, "General Zhang is a celebrated leader of our state, and Liu Bei is afraid of him.
but Han Fu was still anxious and afraid. Seeking Yuan Shao's permission to leave, he went to stay with Zhang Miao.
Liu Biao's wife of the Cai clan protested, "Han Song is the hopeof the state of Chu. He is perfectly correct, and you have no rightto execute him."
"That is certainly a cause for concern," agreed Zhao Yan, "butwe must consider how serious it is.
In the winter, in the tenth month, the Grand Commandant Xu Yu left office. The Minister of Ceremonies Yang Ci became Grand Commandant.
ut instead you are making a marriageconnection with Yuan Shu. You will surely [218] get a reputationfor disloyalty, and your position will be less secure than a pile ofeggs."
Cao Cao's army came to Shengshi. Tao Qian had died,
So Sun Quan built Shitou Citadel and shifted his capital toMoling. He changed the name from Moling to Jianye.
Xu You, commander of a small force in that territory, refused to submit to Cao Cao but sent insulting messages instead.Cao Cao was furious, and wanted to attack Xu You.
"Have you considered the wealth and resources, the tools andweapons of Yuzhang?" continued Yu Fan. "And the bravery of thepeople, how do they compare with my commandery?"
Chen Deng the Administrator of Guangling led the troops of hiscommandery as advance guard for Cao Cao, and came to Xiapi.
A time came that Li Jue sent a gift of some food, and Guo Si's wife made salted beans into a poisonous drug, then picked them out as if they had come with the present. Showing them to her husband, she said, "Two cocks cannot roost on the same branch. I do not believe you should be so trusting of Lord Li."
All Lu Qiang's family were put in prison and their property was confiscated.
About this time an edict was sent to all officials, that they should present an analysis of the most important concerns of the government. Cai Yong sent in a sealed memorandum which read: "Now the ceremonies of Welcoming the Ethers of the Seasons at the Five Suburban Sites, of worship at the Imperial Ancestral Temples, and of Entertaining the Aged at the Hall of the Circular Moat,11 these are the great work of the man who holds the imperial position, and this is the responsibility handed down to him from his ancestors.
Lii Meng left Sun He [i.e. Sun Jiao] to take charge of affairs at Lingling, and that same day he led his army back to Yiyang.
At this time there were summer rains and floods. Low-lying areas near the sea were flooded, the roads were blocked with mud, and the enemy held the major crossings. The army could not get forward.
"If a man serves a lord,"replied Yan Wen, "he can only die for him once.
"If you receive the court now," replied Ju Shou, "you will be acting with justice to fulfil the needs of the time. Unless you decide quickly, someone else will be ahead of you."
If you now, without good reason, make plans to abandon the temples of the imperial clan and to leave the imperial tombs, then I am afraid the people will tremble in fear and there will surely be confusion like a boiling broth.
Zang Hong was lying on the ground, but he stared up in scorn and replied, "All the Yuan served the Han, and in four generations they held five posts as Excellency. It may well be said that they received favour.
"In the winter of the year before last [Yanxi 7] it was extremely cold, so much that birds and animals were killed, fish and tortoises came to harm, and even some leaves of the bamboos and cypresses by the city wall were withered and dry.
If anything I have said casts doubt upon my loyalty, I shall be only too pleased to offer myself for execution".
and so Zhang Hong came to Wu. The mother of Sun Quan[Lady Wu] believed that he was too young [to take full authority],so she commissioned Zhang Hong and Zhang Zhao to act togetheras his assistants.
The decision, however, has been taken out of my hands, and so we come to this. Indeed, I am sad and ashamed and I could not face coming to audience any earlier."
"Now, if ruler and minister do not respect one another's confidences, then the ruler will suffer because his secret affairs are leaked to others, while the minister may encounter the misfortune of death. I trust that you would treat this memorial with care, and do not allow an officer like me, offering you complete loyalty, to suffer from the hatred of wicked men."
Talking about the Liang clan will lead to talk about the emperor, and that may bring disaster once again.We must accept the misfortune that is past, and take responsibility for the present upon ourselves."
"In earlier times," responded Xun Yu, "when Duke Wen of Jinreceived King Xiang of the Zhou, all the feudal lords admired himand followed him. 20 Gaozu of Han wore mourning for theProvisional Emperor and the people of the empire turned theirhearts to him.
Dong Zhuo was by nature cruel and vindictive, he had come suddenly to supreme power and he controlled all the arms and treasure of the empire. His authority shook the empire and his ambitions knew no limit. He said to his retainers, "It is written on my countenance that I should gain the highest honours."
The General of the Household Xu Dan of Danyang, one of Liu Bei's officers, opened the gates and received him.
Wearing armour and riding a mailed horse, the emperor was hailed as "General Supreme". He went about the army three times, then came back and handed the soldiers over to He Jin.
Cen Zhi and Zhang Mu got away and fled into hiding.
At this, the eunuchs sent in hostile reports, and the emperor was angry. Both Zhai Chao and Huang Fu were sentenced to have their heads shaved, to be manacled about the neck, and to be sent as convict labourers in the Enclosure of the Left.
As their followers surrendered or scattered, Zhang Ju and Zhang Chun fled across the fromtier.
"On the other hand, Wei Gu and his fellows have not yet madea public break from the imperial authority. They claim [342] theyare asking for their former master [Wang Yi],
Then Zhang Jian destroyed Hou Lan's tomb buildings and confiscated his property. He sent in a report on the whole affair,
The Lady Xu secretly sent a man she could rely upon to tellSun Gao, Fu Ying and others, trusted former officers of Sun Yi, thatthey should get rid of Gui Lan. Sun Gao and Fu Ying wept and gavetheir promise, and they called privately on some twenty men whohad served Sun Yi in his time and been favoured by him. Theymade an oath together and prepared their plans.
He Yi and other leaders brought a horde of Yellow Turbans from Yingchuan and Runan to join Yuan Shu. Cao Cao attacked them and defeated them.
As Zhang Liao reached Jiashi he heard that the city had fallen, and he turned back.
and Yang Qiu surrend ered. Cao Cao gave him back his position and had him stay to lookafter his people.
In the autumn, in the seventh month on the day jiashen [26 Aug], there was a fire in a pavilion of the park of Pingling [the tomb of Emperor Zhao of Former Han].
Just at this moment, in Cao Cao's array the ships of the fleet are joined stem to stern. We can burn them and put them to flight."
Because of his good work, Xu You acted proud and arrogant. Onone occasion he was present in open assembly, and he called CaoCao by his childhood name,22 saying, "But for me, you would neverhave taken Ji province." Cao Cao laughed and said, "You are right,"
Once you have destroyed Huang Zu's army, drum the advance to the west and occupy the Passes of Chu.Your power will grow and extend, and you will eventually be able to take over the territory of Ba and Shu.
Besides this, Dong Zhuo had ordered Lü Bu to guard the doors to his private quarters, and he had taken the opportunity to seduce one of the maid-servants. So he felt uneasy about that too.
containing Part 8 of the reign of Emperor Xian Jian'an 14: 209 AD
The Regular Attendant Shan Chao was ill.[In the eleventh month] on the day renyin [3 Dec]he was appointed General of Chariots and Cavalry.
Cao Cao sent Zhang Liao to camp at Changshe.19 Just before he set out some men in the army planned to rebel, and during the night they raised an alarm and started fires. All the army was disturbed,
When the tablets were first erected, the carriages of those who came to see them and to take rubbings of them were numbered by the thousands every day, filling and blocking the roads.
In the spring, in the second month Cao Cao came from Chunyu back to Ye.
Where else can I go? I must die here!
Because of their upright conduct, Shen Pei of Wei commandery and Tian Feng of Julu had both failed to realise their ambitions under Han Fu. Yuan Shao appointed Tian Feng as his Attendant Officer and Shen Pei as Headquarters Officer. Xu You and Pang Ji of Nanyang, with Xun Shen of Yingchuan, all became councillors.
but when the province rebelled they both turned against him.
Sun Quan sent the Colonel Liang Yu to take in tribute,and he sent back Zhu Guang and others.He also sent a letter describinghimself as subject to Cao Cao, and urging the question of the Mandate of Heaven.
"What would your idea be?" asked Cao Cao.
Give Huangfu Yizhen [Huangfu Song]command as general at Shan. That will keep them peaceful and secure."
In the summer, in the fourth month seven of the commanderies and kingdoms suffered floods.
Liu Hong was a great-grandson of the Filial King of Hejian. His grandfather Liu Shu and his father Liu Chang had held the fief of Jiedu Village in succession.
When Cao Cao came to this region, Xu Chu brought his forcesto join him. "Here," said Cao Cao, "is my Fan Kuai!"37 He immedi ately appointed Xu Chu as his Commandant and guard at night,while all his retainers were made Tiger Warriors.
Cao Cao was pleased and said to him, "In the misfortune at the YuRiver, even I was helpless and confused. But you kept control in theconfusion, you punished cruel robbers, and you have strengthenedour defences. You have consistently maintained honour and goodconduct. Could any of the most famous generals in the past havedone better?"
When Yang Qiu received this urgent summons, he went to the emperor and said, "Though I am not a man of pure and lofty conduct, I bear general responsibility to act as a dog or a kite [in cleaning up the work of evildoers]. I have so far put to death Wang Fu and Duan Jiong, but they were of small account, no more than foxes, and that is not an achievement to show the empire.
Yuan Shu knew that Sun Ce was resentful [because he had not received the appointments he had been promised], but since Liu Yao held Qu'a and Wang Lang was in Kuaiji he did not expect he would be successful. So he gave his permission,
All who came with litigation were persuaded by his arguments and would abandon their dispute.
This was discovered later, and everyone thanked Guo Tai and acknowledged his wisdom.
Jing Gu, son of the Imperial Clerk Jing Yi, had become a pupil of Li Ying, but had not [at that stage] registered his name.As a result, he was not affected by the proscription. Jing Yi, however, said with a sigh, "I regarded Li Ying as a worthy man and sent my son to study with him. How can I avoid responsibility just because he failed to register his name?"
On another occasion, they were playing with dogs in the Western Garden, and the emperor dressed one with the Cap of Worthy Advancement and tied a sash about it.
Since Zhang Yang felt that it was his achievement, he had named these apartments Yang'an.
Before this, Yang Xiu, Registrar to the Chancellor, with Ding Yi and his brother [I], were planning for Cao Zhi to succeed his father.The [then] General of the Household for All Purposes, CaoPi, was anxious about it. He took a chariot, filled it with empty baskets, and had the magistrate of Chaoge county, Wu Zhi, hide in it and come to advise him.
On the day dingmao [20 Jun] there was a fire at the Gate of Prolonged Life at the Yuanling [tomb of Emperor Guangwu].
Since the time of the Grand Excellency [Li He],2 we have accumulated virtue and maintained benevolence.How could things come now to such a pass!"
The Regular Attendants Tang Heng, the Marquis of Ruyang, and Xu Huang the Marquis of Wuyuan, both died.
Sun Quan divided Danyang to form the new commandery of Xindu, with He Qi as Administrator.
As soon as Cao Cao heard that Xu You had come, he went barefootto greet him, grasped him by the hand and laughed, "Ziyuan, youhave come a long way. 41 Now I am sure to succeed."
Kuitou died and his younger brother Budugen took the throne.
Even if you 'took the Yin and Yang as your fuel, and the myriad things of the world as your metal,even if all the work was done by people who needed nothing to eat, supervised by officials who were never hungry, there would still not be enough satisfy the unending deman.
The emperor had no alternative [but to succumb to this pressure], and on the day xinsi [10 Dec] the Honoured Lady Dou was established as Empress. Dou Wu was appointed Specially Advanced and Colonel of the City Gates, and was enfeoffed as Marquis of Huaili.
and the people of that time often referred to them as a pair, so they were put under arrest at the same time.
Liang Ji had held control of the government for almost twenty years, and his authority was recognised both inside [the palace] and out.The emperor's hands were tied, and he could take no action of his own.He was increasingly dissatisfied with this situation, and when Chen Shou died he was even more angry.
Then his mother came to say good-bye to him, and Fan Pang said to her, "Zhongbo is filial and respectful, and he will be able to look after you.
but when he got there the situation was quite different to the way they had described it. "When other people discuss plans," he sighed, "they seldom see things the way one does oneself"
The Master of Writing Lu Zhi wrote in to say: "Many men of the Proscribed Party are innocent of any crime. They would benefit from an amnesty, and that would redress the wrong which has been done them."
"Besides, our lord is strong and his troops in high heart. If wefail to settle the affair now, that can be described as 'Heaven gives itand we do not take it. Disaster will come in return.' This is how Yuebecame hegemon and Wu was destroyed.
As a young man, Zhang Miao had enjoyed acting as a knight-errant,and he was on good terms with both Yuan Shao and Cao Cao.
He used the law to bring harm to scholars and gentlemen of quality and to all those looked upon with greater respect than he was himself, while any man of ability was treated harshly and sent to exile in poor and bad territory.
There were more that thirty thousand students at the Imperial University, with Guo Tai and Jia Biao of Yingchuan as their leaders,
Sun Quan's mother asked the Commandant Who ManifestsFirmness Dong Xi of Kuaiji, "Can we hold the east of the Yangzi?"
In the winter, in the twelfth month the Minister of the Household Xuan Feng of Runan became Excellency of Works.
Dong Zhuo was a man from Longxi, a rough, fierce fellow, but cunning. The Qiang and the northern barbarians were afraid of him.
Whilehalf of his force had still to cross Zhong Yao attacked andcompletely defeated him.
In the summer, in the fourth month, as Geng Bi came to Didao his Attendant Officer led a mutiny and joined the rebels. They killed Cheng Qiu first and then they killed Geng Bi.The rebels now came forward to attack Hanyang.
At this time, the eunuchs wielded considerable power.Zhou Jing sent in a memorial jointly with the Grand Commandant Yang Bing: "Many of the men holding office in the palace and the bureaucracy are unworthy of their position.
Gongsun Zan fought them at Shimen in the Dependent State.Zhang Chun and his forces were completely defeated, and Zhang Chun abandoned his wife and children and fled across the border. All the men and women whom he had kidnapped were recovered.
And you are the chief officer of the state, yet you have established an alliance with such a gang! How can you side with those rebels?"
Quite unperturbed, Chen Deng replied with dignity, "When Isaw Lord Cao, I said that keeping you was like caring for a tiger: itshould be given plenty of meat, or it will bite [219] its master. TheDuke replied,
Refusing all invitations to official position, he died at home.
You can get copper from the hills and salt from thesea.19 There is wealth and abundance within your borders and yoursubjects have no thought of rebellion. What is there to threaten you?Why send hostages?
Pang Degong, from the same county [Xiangyang], had established a great reputation, and Sima Hui treated him as an elder brother.
"All the same, at present I hold a fief of four counties with apension from thirty thousand households; what have I done todeserve so much? Since the rivers and lakelands of the south are notyet settled, I cannot leave my post, but I can certainly give up mycities and lands. I therefore hand back the three counties of Yang xia, Zhe and Ku, with twenty thousand households, keeping onlythe income from ten thousand households in Wuping. This way, Ireduce the opportunity for rumour and slander, and I relieve myselfof some responsibilities."
"Encouraging farming and mulberry-growing so as to nourish theliving, judging between good and bad in order to keep customs well,spreading teaching as a means to manifest reform, setting upmilitary preparations to maintain authority, making rewards andpunishments clear so that all laws are consistent: these are the fivepoints of good government.
When Liang Xi came to office he encouraged people to return. He send courteous summons to all the chiefs of powerful families,recommended them for appointment, and sent them to attend [Cao Cao's] headquarters. When they had left, he gathered their fighting men into an auxiliary force,
As the result of an amnesty, Su Buwei was able to return to his own home, and he now buried his father with full ceremony.
Up to this time the people of Xu had been prosperous, with fair harvests, and many had taken refuge there.
Next day, he saw Sun Shao andappointed him Colonel Who Upholds Courage with command of allhis father's troops.
If a man such as that cannot succeed, it may be a decision of Heaven, but how could he submit to another?"
Fan Pang replied, "When I make a report, it is not because I enjoy dealing in the dirt of oppression and corruption. These matters cause great harm to the people. Why else should I deface an official report with such unpleasantness?"
He ordered the Palace Internuncios to guard the Southern Palace, barring the gates and closing the Covered Way.
"Your majesty, however, has licentious girls and seductive women, the most beautiful in all the world. You delight in fine food and splendid wine, and you demand every luxury. How can you expect to emulate Huang-Lao?" When this memorial was sent in, Xiang Kai was summoned to the Imperial Secretariat to explain himself.
Yuan Tan sighed,"Now the whole province has rebelled. What have I done wrong?"
Sun Quan sent Zhuge Jin in an embassy of reply, and they renewed their covenant of goodwill.
Surely it is necessary only to display your spiritual authority and make clear your orders and commands. Then even if men are supervising one another's home territory, they will be fearful and not dare to seek private advantage. If that is done, what need is there to be concerned about the Three Relationships?
At that time a fire from heaven burnt the city [of Mianzhu] and Liu Yan shifted his government to Chengdu. An ulcer broke out on his back and he died.
He drew his own sword from his belt, gave a summary salute, and stormed out.
If you are successful you can serve the royal house and set the empire to rights. If you fail, you will still have time to run away."
So Cao Cao appointed Du Ji as Admini strator of Hedong.
In the morning they cannot be sure of the evening, and the people have no means to sustain their lives. "On the other hand, should you fail to deal with them now anddecide to wait another year, then next harvest there may be grain,and your enemies will have recognised their errors. They willreform their government and revive their power, so you will havelost the chance to use your soldiers.
So He Jin spoke to the Dowager, asking to dismiss all the Regular Attendants and those of lower rank, and to appoint Gentle- men of the Three Corps to fill their places.
In the summer, in the fourth month on the day wuchen [?]the Grand Commandant Zhou Jing died. The Excellency of Works Xuan Feng left office and the Commandant of the Guards of the Palace of Prolonged Joy, Wang Chang, became Excellency of Works.
Zhao Yan had with him some hundred and fifty foot-soldiers and horsemen, all of them relatives or fellow-townsmen of the mutineers. When these heard the news they too became agitated: they put on armour and took up weapons, and they would not calm down.
The Master of Writing Zhu Mu recommended the Prefect of the Enclosure of the Right, Du Shang of Shanyang, as Inspector of Jing province.
In the sixth month Li Jue's officer Yang Feng made plans to kill him. The plot was discovered, but Yang Feng led his men in a mutiny and so Li Jue's army was somewhat weakened.
As he was aboutto leave, Cao Cao took him by the hand and said, "This way, I amentrusting the affairs of the east to you."
Then he gave a great shout, and all his men joined the cry and charged with him. The cavalry came on the enemy flanks, and they struck them and broke them. The Qiang were thrown into complete disarray, and more than eight thousand of them were slain.
Before this, when the imperial edict was issued calling for reports of those involved in faction, some of the commanderies and kingdoms submitted more than a hundred names. The Chancellor of Pingyuan, Shi Bi, was the only one who sent none.
It is difficult to express one's full opinion on the futility and dishonesty of this dirty mess.
"Our army is camped at Jiaoqiu. I am leaving now. If we haveno reply to our summons by midday tomorrow, then this is good bye."
Duan Jiong was recalled to the capital and was appointed a Palace Attendant.
The bandits of Ai county [in Yuzhang] attacked the commandery and county offices of Changsha.They killed the magistrate of Yiyang [county in Changsha], and their numbers rose to more than ten thousand.The Internuncio Ma Mu, taking command over the Inspector of Jing province Liu Du, attacked them.The [imperial] army was defeated and Ma Mu and Liu Du both took to flight.
Lu Xun later went to the capital, and in his report he praised Chunyu Shi as an excellent official.
In the spring, in the first month on the day xinwei [6 Mar], there was an amnesty for the empire.1
Pang Ji and Shen Pei had always been on bad terms with YuanTan, but Xin Ping and Guo Tu both supported him, so they had afeud with Shen Pei and Pang Ji.
Then he suddenly gave orders for Xun Yu to be kept in hiscompany, with position as Palace Attendant, Household Counsellorbearing the Staff of Authority, and Adviser to the Army of theChancellor.
They held two-thirds of the empire but they still submitted to the Yin.
If wegive up and go away it will show how weak we are, and they will allturn against us. Even if we wanted to retreat, could we manage it?We would be defeating ourselves without a fight.
"I have orders to execute you," replied Sun Jian. "What is my crime?" asked Wang Rui.
Li Jue called up several thousand men of the Qiang and other tribes.First he gave them imperial treasure, silk and embroideries, and promised them women from the palace to be their slaves, then he urged them to attack Guo Si.
On the Day of Washing the Buddha enormous quantities of food and drink were set out on mats along the roads for scores of li, and the wastage was counted in hundreds and hundreds of thousands.
I hear that Guan Yu has already sent a detachment towards Jia,and that the whole area south of Xu city is disturbed. The reason Guan Yu does not go forward is because he is afraid our army may cut off his rear.
Quite recently, your wicked subject Lao Xiu sent in an accusation of faction. As a result the former Director of Retainers Li Ying and others have been arrested and put to the question, and the matter now involves several hundred people.
He also changed the administrators and magistrates in all the commanderies and counties.
Before this, when the emperor was Marquis of Liwu he had been tutored by Zhou Fu of Ganling.16 When he came to the throne [in 146], Zhou Fu was called to be a Master of Writing [in the Imperial Secretariat].
Every subordinate commander here, however, has ideasof his own, and there is no way to be sure they will submit and obeyyou.
Sun Ce's mother the Lady Wu took her stand by a great welland said to him, "You are building up the south of the Yangzi, andthe work is not complete. This is the time to treat your worthy menwell and be polite to your officers, forget their faults but note theirgood work.
Then they went into the Xuwu hills, made camp in some open land among steep passes, and lived there. Tian Chou himself tilled the ground to keep his father and mother. People came to join him there, and in several years their numbers grew until there were more than five thousand families.
Liu Chong had formerly been Administrator of Kuaiji.He cleared away all vexatious and cruel measures, he prohibited and checked all that was unlawful, so the commandery became extremely well ordered.Then he was summoned to the capital, to become Court Architect.
Du Mi had shared in reputation with Li Ying,
Even if your coins were a whole foot square, how would they be any help in such a time of danger!"
Wang Meng cursed him, "In former times, you served us as our slave.And now you are a slave that has turned against his master. The cruel treatment you give us this day will later be returned to you."
The Protector of the Qiang Duan Jiong attacked the Lejie Qiang and defeated them.
The General of the Household Rapid as a Tiger Yuan Shu joined Wu Kuang, and they attacked and chopped the gates, while the eunuchs took up weapons to defend them.
Now the roads and streets are buzzing with gossip about a certain Lady Cheng; and if we examine her reputation then it is clear that she too will be a disaster for the state. At the highest level, a watchful guard should be established, with clear prohibitions. And at the same time we should be very careful of [such people as] Zhao Rao and Huo Yu, who constitute a notable danger.
Duan Jiong was angry, and he ordered his Assistant Officer Zhang Xian to go to Su Buwei's house and kill him. First, however, he gave a vial of poison to Zhang Xian's father, telling him, "If Zhang Xian does not succeed in taking Su Buwei, you can drink this."
On the day bingchen [13 May], the emperor died in the Hall of Excellent Virtue.
Chen Fan sent a letter to criticise them, "The principles of the past require that duty be maintained even when the ruler dies.
He therefore made a proclamation, "Bu Yang and Pan Hong have acted as bandits for more than ten years, and they are practised in both attack and defence.
but when Guo Yuan sent up the tally of heads [for thiscampaign] they matched the actual figures. Cao Cao asked himwhy, and Guo Yuan explained, "When I attack an enemy outsideour borders, I exaggerate the numbers killed and captured because Iwant to emphasise the military achievement and inspire the people.
This means that if one is looking for a loyal official, one must go to the door of a filial son. Jin Yun should first have rescued his closest relative.
In the spring, in the first month there was a comet in the Northern Dipper.
The Regular Attendant Zhao Zhong was named General of Chariots and Cavalry,
If we break out now when he is not expecting us, we can take him.
"Now Liang province is one of the most important and valuable districts of the empire and a bulwark of our state.
Chen Gui, however, replied, "General Cao is restoring law and order, and will disperseand pacify cruelty and evil. In my opinion [217] you should assisthim, and think only how to help the house of Han.
Guo Gong asked to see Xun Yu. Xun Yu was prepared to go, but Xiahou Dun and the others said, "You are the safeguard for the whole province. If you go you will certainly be in danger. You must not do it."
People sang and danced in the streets, and the shops in the city were filled with men and women selling pearls and jade, dresses and clothing, to buy wine and meat for celebration.
When Ni Heng abused Cao Cao, however, Cao Cao was angryand said to Kong Rong, "Ni Heng is a fool, and I should kill himlike a small bird or a rat. I believe, however, though it is quiteundeserved, that this fellow has gained some reputation. If I killhim, people everywhere will say I lack tolerance."
The Household Counsellor Xu Xiang became Excellency of Works;
Someone said to Yuan Shu, "If Sun Jian captures Luoyang, you will not be able to control him. This is like killing a wolf and getting a tiger instead."
In both places [Hanzhong and Nan commandery] their fortunes hang in the balance, and even to survive requires more energy than they can afford. How can they possibly find the extra resources to deal with this part of the world?
Someof the attendants wanted to chase after him, but Cao Cao said, "Thatman has chosen his master. Let him go."
Men of stupidity and meanness, dirt and disgrace, not only were they kept from the court, they were banished from their villages and districts.
Later Lü Bu became less favourable to him, and because WeiXu was a close relative he took Gao Shun's men and gave them toWei Xu.
As a result of this, power and authority was concentrated in the hands of the eunuch officials.
Fan Zhou comes from an old family in Nanyang, explained Pan Jun. "He talks well, but he has absolutely no idea how to plan anything.
And all the other excellencies and ministers gave their support to Chen Qiu's argument.
In the spring, in the third month [miswritten for the second month]on the day dingmao [22 Mar], first of the month, there was aneclipse of the sun.
So Cao Pi shed tears as he bowed farewell, and Cao Cao and his attendants wept in sympathy. Everyone felt now that though Cao Zhi had splendid words, he lacked true feeling.
In the second month on the day yisi [13 Mar], first of the month,there was an eclipse of the sun.
Liu Zhang was angry and killed Zhang Lu'smother and younger brother. Then Zhang Lu seized Hanzhong and declared war on LiuZhang.
The miserable commandery of Liaodong, how dare they claimto grant credentials?" Han Zhong said, "My Liaodong is east of a vast sea, withmillions of soldiers and with the services of the Fuyu, the Hui andthe Mo.
On the day guihai [26 Mar] the Empress Deng was dismissed. She was sent to the Drying House Building, where she died of misery.
He senthis officers Gao Lan and Zhang He to attack Cao Cao's defences.[288]
Shi Bi of Chenliu, Adjutant of the Northern Army, sent in a sealed letter, "I have heard that the proper attitude of an emperor or king towards his relatives and kinsmen is that although his affection is abundant he will certainly display it with authority, and even though the person is of noble birth he will certainly apply the regular restraints to him.
In the summer, in the fifth month the Director of Retainers Duan Jiong became Grand Commandant.
Embarrassed and ashamed, the Masters of Writing returned to their work.
The Imperial Clerk Zhang Hong protested, "To gain advantage from another man's mourning does not accordwith traditional patterns of honourable conduct. If you fail, more over, you will have made enemies and ended good feeling. This is atime to behave generously."
On this day [23 May] Li Jue shifted the emperor once more, to the Northern Fort, and appointed a colonel to keep the gate.The emperor was now cut off from all contact with the outside. The faces of his personal attendants were drawn with hunger,
and an edict was issued to reprimand Chen Fan and Yang Bing most severely;they were dismissed and banished to their home territories.Mu Mao and Shangguan Zi were each reduced two grades in rank and salary.
Because of this, however, I made enemies of powerful men. I was afraid I would bring misfortune to my family, so I plead ed sick and went back home.
On the day jiaxu [28 Sep] Dong Zhuo summoned all the officials to another assembly in the front apartments of the Hall of Exalted Virtue. There he compelled the Dowager to issue an edict dismissing the Little Emperor: "In mourning, the emperor lacked the feelings of a true son, while his dignity and conduct are unworthy of a ruler. We now depose him to be King of Hongnong and we establish Liu Xie, King of Chenliu, as Emperor."
At that same time, Sun Jian was with Zhou Shen. He offered to lead ten thousand men forward to Jincheng, leaving Zhou Shen to act as rearguard with twenty thousand.
Liang Ji heard about this and was furious.He had the office of the capital put out a summons for the arrest of the two men.Hu Wu's whole household was punished, and more than sixty people died.
For this reason the one who holds highposition must first increase his people's property in order to settletheir ambitions; this is called 'nourishing life'.
Gan Ning said to Zhang Zhao, "Our ruler has given you position like [Emperor Gao of Former Han gave to] Xiao He.If all you can do is sit and worry about rebellions, how will you compare to the men of ancient time?"
"I am sorry they were too few!" answered Shen Pei.
Then is your majesty afraid those two [Cao Ren and Xu Huang] will not use their utmost strength?
Yuan Tan wasdefeated and withdrew to Nanpi.
The Imperial Secretariat summoned Yang Bing to answer [for this failure of security], but Yang Bing replied, "The misdeeds of Ren Fang and his fellows have all been carried out at the orders of Shan Kuang. I ask to send a cage cart tobring Shan Kuang to account.If we examine him thoroughly, we can trace the origins of the whole wicked business."
Guo Si's wife was afraid that her husband [150] was having an affair with one of Li Jue's serving girls, and she was determined to break it up.
The General of the Guards Dong Cheng was made General ofChariots and Cavalry.
He had the emperor hold a sword and hop along,and the wet-nurse Zhao Rao and others acted as his escort. He took possession of the palace passes,and barred the doors of the harem apartments. Then he called in the subordinate officers of the Imperial Secretariat, threatened them with naked weapons, and had them draw up documents for an imperial edict to appoint Wang Fu as Prefect of the Yellow Gates with a Staff of Authority, that he might go to the Northern Prison and arrest Yin Xun and Shan Bing.
In the ninth month the Bearer of the Mace Dong Chong was found guilty of making unjustified requests on behalf of the staff of the Empress of [the Palace of] Perpetual Joy. He was sent to prison and died.
His baggage was in the rear and he had few armoured men.All about him were afraid,
Liang Ji heard about this, and sent men in secret to arrest Yuan Zhu.Yuan Zhu changed his name, and pretended he had taken ill and died.He made the figure of a man from rushes, purchased a coffin and had a public funeral performed.
Guo Tai saw this and admired him, so he asked to stay with him.
and Yuan Shu complained angrily that "These worthless fellows are deserting me to join our family slave."
Li Tong attacked and defeated the various bandit groups led byQu Gong and others,
Du Shang gave orders for the men to feed the horses, and to rest and eat, and next day he led his men direct to the enemy camp. Bu Yang and Pan Hong and their fellows felt secure in their isolated fastness, and had no further preparations for defence. The imperial forces took advantage of their surprise, and the enemy were smashed and settled.
Hou Lan had a residence at Fangdong,31 where he bullied and oppressed the people.
I fear that whenthings are decided there will be accusations made and punishmentscarried out, and you will be one of the first to be executed!"
Some time later, Li Ying was again appointed as Director of Retainers.
He also said, "The two Directors Xun grew ever more reliable in their judgement of men. As long as I live I shall never forget them."
and when Gongsun Zan was destroyed Yuan Shao took theoccasion to grant seals and ribbons as Shanyu to Tadun, Nanlou,Supuyan and Wuyan.
In the eleventh month Cao Cao came to the Yi River. The Wuhuan Shanyu Pufulu of Dai commandery and Nalou [i.e. Nanlou] of Shang[gu] came to offer congratulations.
Dong Zhuo arrested all the men of wealthy houses, put them to death for wrongdoing and confiscated their property. The dead could not be counted.
He Kui, Administrator of Changguang,29 said to Cao Cao, "The[282] former kings distinguished the taxes of the nine tributaries,taking notice of distance, and they maintained three sets ofregulations [for governing according to conditions] of recentpacification, good administration or rebellion.
When Kong Rong was dead, no-one at Xu city dared collect his remains.
In the spring an ordinance was promulgated:"'Meng Gongchuo was well competent to be chief officer of Zhao orWei, but unworthy of the highest position in Teng or Xue.'
In the eighth month the Qiang of [Zuo]pingyi plundered the counties of that commandery. Guo Si, Fan Chou and the others led out their troops and defeated them.
Chen Gongsaid, "Cao Cao has come a long way, and he cannot stay hereindefinitely.
"Now the Master of Techniques appropriates valuable goods sent in by the commanderies, and the Palace Wardrobe gathers silk from the tribute of the empire. The offices in the Western Garden withdraw funds from the treasury of the Ministry of Finance, and the palace stables take horses which belong to [169] the Minister Coachman. And even from these offices again you subtract your personal share."You are raising the burden of taxation and making things more difficult for the people, and local expenditure is increasing without any gain in revenue. As dishonest ministers take profits, the common people of the empire suffer loss.
Before this, Yuan Shao had three sons, Tan, Xi and Shang.
Chen Gong said to Lü Bu, "Attack them at once. With fresh soldiersto deal with tired ones you cannot fail."
Zhang He retreated to Nanzheng, and Liu Bei went back to Chengdu.
In resentment and hatred his subjects have nowhere to turn, and disasters and rebellion appear together. The heart of the empire is disturbed and confused, and barbarians make raids and incursions. Like falling earth and shattered tiles, the dynasty disappears in a single day.
Hou Can, younger brother of the Regular Attendant Hou Lan, was Inspector of Yi province. Cruel and extortionate, he accumulated treasure which was counted by the hundreds of thousands.
Even when he was young, Fan Pang had been admired by the people of his neighbourhood for his strict and absolute honesty.
If you want the people to flourish, with abundant prosperity, then the first requirement is to put a stop to the demands for public labour services and to prohibit private extortion. If you did that, the people would have enough for their needs without any great effort.
From this time on, the emperor never climbed a tower again.
They said, "It is Father Jia who has given life [to these children],"
Now you, my general, hold a long-established position as chief support of the state, comparable to that of Yi [Yin] or [the Duke of] Zhou.Yet we hear nothing of your virtues in government, and the people aresuffering in mud and ashes.You cannot bring yourself to associate with those upright men who might give help in time of misfortune and danger, but instead you seek to block their mouths.You have deceived and misled our sovereign, so that black and yellow change colours, and a deer is confused with a horse!
Zhang Xiu had always respected what Jia Xu said, so he collectedhis scattered soldiers and went again in pursuit.
LiuBei's army became stronger and stronger, and he sent some of hisofficers to pacify and overcome the subordinate counties.
Please think about it!". "You are right," agreed Sun Ce,
In wisdom alone was the Founder of Han [214] superior to Xiang Yu; and though Xiang Yu was strong he was taken in the end.
Cao Cao took Zhang Xiu by thehand, gave a banquet, arranged for his son Cao Jun to marry ZhangXiu's daughter,
To take the ruler's place is a serious duty. To be master of a state is a fearful task.
Gongsun Du's authority was respected beyond the seas, and many people fled to him from the disorders of China proper, including Guan Ning, Bing Yuan and Wang Lie, all from Beihai.
Li Jue and his fellows, increasingly worried, had no idea what to do. They were going to scatter and hurry by side-paths back to their homes, but the Colonel Who Exterminates Caitiffs Jia Xu from Wuwei said, "If you leave your troops and travel alone, then the headman of a single village will be able to arrest you.
West from the Qiao Gate and east from Luochuan there are old frontier stations, cities and towns,so communications are easy to maintain. This is not country which is deeply divided or dangerous. Carriages and horsemen can travel without difficulty or interruption.
Years later, Sun Quan spoke with Lu Xun about Zhou Yu, Lu Su and Lü Meng: "Gongjin [Zhou Yu] was brave and fierce, his courage and skill surpassing all others. So he defeated Mengde [Cao Cao] and extended our territory into Jing province. He stands alone without compare.
Then CaoCao made 'thunder cars' to fire stones at Yuan Shao's towers anddestroyed them all.36 Yuan Shao made a tunnel to attack Cao Cao,but Cao Cao dug a long ditch inside his walls to block it.
Yuan Shu joined Gongsun Zan, so Yuan Shao made an alliance with Liu Biao.Many of the leading retainers of the Yuan clan went over to Yuan Shao,
Without waiting for reinforcements, Gongsun Zan advanced deep into enemy territory; but then the tables were turned and he was besieged at Guanzi fortress in Liaoxi by Qiuliju and his army.18 Over two hundred days, with his army scattered and his supplies exhausted, five or six out of ten of his officers and men died.
At thisthey began to fight and take from one other and the group broke upand scattered.
The Protector of the Qiang Duan Jiong attacked the Dangjian Qiang and defeated them.
How can one possibly say that the miseries of the people are caused only by the relative values of the currency, or the varying weights of the coinage?
In the winter, in the tenth month, as Gao Gan heard of Cao Caoattacking the Wuhuan, he rebelled again in Bing province. Hearrested the Administrator of Shangdang and brought troops to holdthe entrance to the Hu Pass.
Each year the Shanyu was allotted floss-silk, silken cloth, cash and grain like a marquis, and his sons and grandsons inherited the title.
Cao Cao wrote letters in a private canvass of opinion, but the Master of Writing Cui Yan made open reply, "It is the principle of Chunqiu that in establishing a son you take the eldest.
When they drew up that line of battle, Liu Bei was suspicious and did not come across.
He faced Zhang Rang and his fellows with an angry shout, "If you do not die quickly, I shall kill you."
The Tuteruo shizhujiu Shanyu of the Southern Xiongnu died. His son Hucheng succeeded him.
"If people will not come to you," replied Kuai Liang, "it is because you have not shown sufficient humanity. If they come, but then act badly, it is because you have not shown sufficient justice.
You should cultivate virtue and reduce punishments, and you may then obtain the full blessings of the Zhongsi Ode.
In the winter, in the tenth month, the barbarians of Wuling rebelled.The commandery troops attacked them and defeated them.
Your majesty, however, has failed to make a full investigation, and you have been influenced by slander, and so it has come about that loyal subjects have shared the penalty of those who are true evil-doers. Spring has passed through to winter, and they have still not received your mercy. Near and far, all people look and listen to learn of their fate, and they are anxious and concerned on their behalf.
If your majesty looks upon the common people as your children,why do you not extend to them the grace of your soothing and comfort?
Yuan Shu replied, "The emperor is wise and capable, with the nature of King Cheng of Zhou.
and King Cao of WEI was even thinking of shifting the capital from Xu city to avoid his attacks.Sima Yi, however, Major to the Army of the Chancellor, and the Junior Clerk in the Department of the West Jiang Ji both said to him, "Yu Jin and his comrades were destroyed by floods, they were not defeated in battle, and there not yet any real damage to the great plans of our state.
If a gentleman is trained by ritual and instruction to distinguish honouror shame, that will change his inner nature, while fetters or the whipapplied to a petty fellow will change his outward behaviour.
The Imperial Clerk Liu Yao was a younger brother of Liu Dai. He had earlier gained a fine reputation, and an imperial letter was sent to appoint him as Inspector of Yang province.
26 January 160 - 12 February 161
the Bioeraphy of Cao Cao.Jian'an 22: 217 AD 25 Jamuary 217 - 12 February 218
Cao Cao's officers all wanted to follow up their victory with adirect attack. Guo Jia, however, argued that, "Yuan Shao lovedthose two sons, but neither was proclaimed as his heir.
We need only send troops to camp at the passes and strategic points, and all [the supporters of Dong Zhuo and the emperor] will be cramped and die.
Sun Ce clapped his hands and laughed, and it was then that hedecided to take over Yuzhang.
He also intended to kill Xuan.Xuan's house was next door to that of the Regular Attendant Yuan She, and Liang Ji's men climbed into Yuan She's house to get at Xuan's. Yuan She discovered them, and he called out and beat on a drum to gather a crowd and to warn Xuan.
Just then Liu Bei was eating, and he dropped his spoon andchopsticks [in his flurry]. At that moment there was thunder in thesky, and Liu Bei said, "The sage has it, 'On a sudden clap ofthunder, or a violent wind, he would change composure.' Very muchlike me."
"In former times Han Anguo was raised from a Palace Attendant [to become Clerk of the Capital in his own state of Liang], and Zhu Maichen came from obscurity and poverty to become Administrator in his own home territory. Both men were chosen for suitability and capacity, and they returned to govern their own home country. Why did the government of that time find no need to concern itself with the restriction of this Law of the Three Relationships, binding them with unnecessary regulation?
In the spring, in the second month on the day jisi [15 Apr], there was an amnesty for the empire.
But now he is burning palaces and houses, and he has kidnapped the Son of Heaven and sent him away. All within the seas is in disorder and no-one knows where to turn. This is the time he is condemned by Heaven. One battle and the empire is settled."
Even so, I still have hope. Can you tell if I may ever be successful?"
Guo Tai replied, "At night I observe the signs of the heavens. By daylight I examine the affairs of men. That which Heaven is destroying cannot be supported. I shall continue my idle wandering a few more years, and that is all."
How can the crimes of Dou Wu be imputed to the Dowager? Hidden away in an empty palace, suffering as if under hail and storm, her miseries have touched the heart of Heaven. How can your majesty face the world?
This was a wantoncriminal act. He should be punished and destroyed quickly.
Havingreceived the grace of life from our lord, I dare not oppose hiscommands,
If he turns against you, I can lead soldiers to attackhis rear. If he only attacks the city, then you can give help fromoutside.
And then, when I grade them by the degrees of nobility, they will recognise the value of such honours. When honour and grace are both established, and high and low properly ordered, this is the core of good govern ment."
I beg now to carry out this duty, and I ask that your majesty grant pardon for their lives to my brothers, and permit my family to retain some part of our inheritance. This would redound to your broad and generous humanity.
"All that needs to be done is to choose wise and competent men for the administration. Then everything will be settled quite simply. There is no need for a military campaign."
Zhong Yao urged Wang Yi to hand over his insignia of office,but Wang Yi took the seal and ribbon with him and went straightfrom Hebei to present himself at Xu city.
Zhang Miao was afraid that in the end Cao Cao would kill him as a favour to Yuan Shao. He too felt uneasy.
Those who had charge of palace documents first advised Zhu Yu, [the eunuch who was] Clerk for All Purposes at the Palace of Prolonged Joy, [about the memorial].Zhu Yu opened the memorial in secret and without authorisation. He cursed and said, "Any palace officials who have abused power may certainly be executed. But what crimes have we others committed? Yet we and all our families are now to be massacred!"
Those lands of the east have already taken in the harvest, and they will wait for you with strong walls and empty fields. You will not be able to capture anything, and there will be nothing to plunder. In less than ten days, an army of hundred thousand men would be in trouble before ever it began to fight.
"You are good at using troops,but no match for Lord Cao.
Zhao Wei and the other senior officers of the province knew that Liu Yan's son Zhang was lenient and gentle, so they joined to set him up as Inspector of Yi province.
Huo Jun had only a few hundred soldiers in the city, but he waited for an opportunity when the besiegers were off their guard, then chose his best men to make a sortie. They completely defeated the enemy and cut off Xiang Cun's head.
and while Sun Ce was still in his teens, he had already made friends with well-known men.
Ma [455] Chao is strong, but he is a dishonourable fellow. There are many people withgrievances and it is easy to plan against him."
Cao Cao called Guo Jia to audience and discussed affairs with him. He was pleased and said, "This is certainly a man who can help me gain the empire." As Guo Jia went out he too was pleased and said, "This is the master for me."
"You say that you are not the equal of Wang of Kuaiji,"observed Yu Fan, "and that is extravagant modesty. But it is truethat your best troops are not as good as those of Kuaiji.
On the day xinsi [7 Jun] He Jin brought troops to surround the offices of the General of Agile Cavalry. He arrested Dong Zhong and stripped him of his appointment. Dong Zhong killed himself.
Though his army was defeated at the Chang Slope, said Zhuge Liang, "the troops that have returned to him, added to the fleet commanded by Guan Yu, amount to ten thousand men, all armed and trained. And Liu Qi has joined him with fighting men from Jiangxia, again no fewer than ten thousand men.
When the orchestra was ready Liu Biao wished to hold audience tohear it.
The emperor hated the Liang clan, so the surname of the [new] empress was changed to Pu. Some time later, it was recognised that she was the daughter of Deng Xiang and her surname was changed back again to Deng.
Guo Tai saw this and asked him about it.Meng Min replied, "The pot is broken. What is the point of looking at it?"Considering this showed true discernment, Guo Tai engaged him in further conversation. He recognised his virtuous qualities, and urged him to travel [to Luoyang] to study. As a result, Meng Min made his name known among all the people of that time.
The Grand Commandant Xu Yu and the Excellency of Works Zhang Ji always tried to do as the eunuchs wished, and they regularly took bribes. When relatives or friends of the eunuchs acted corruptly and without discipline, [Xu Yu and Zhang Ji] paid no attention. On the other hand, they threatened to punish some twenty-six men of the border commanderies who were known to be pure and honest and loved by the people.The local officers and people came to the capital to plead on behalf of the accused,
but Hua Xin broke down the doors, destroyed the walls and led the empress out.
Duke Cao of WEI sent Xiahou Yuan to relieve Ji city, but the placehad fallen before the relief had arrived it,
Liu Bei asked who they might be, and Sima Hui replied, "Zhuge Kongming and Pang Shiyuan [Pang Tong]."
Before this, when military commanders were sent on campaign it frequently happened that the eunuchs accused them of wasting or losing part of the army supplies, and they were often punished for this.Feng Gun therefore put in a request that one of the Regular Attendants should act as supervisor of the supplies for his army.
but Cao Cao now controls Jing province and all its territory.Liu Biao had a well-trained fleet, with thousands of armoured boats and other ships of war. If Cao Cao sails all this along the Yangzi and supports it with foot-soldiers, he will be coming against us by land and water."In other words, Cao Cao controls the line of the river as well as we do, and in sheer military strength we have nothing to match him.
In the third month, Cao Cao led his troops away, but he left the General Who Calms the Waves Xiahou Dun as Area Commander over Cao Ren, Zhang Liao and others, and theycamped at Juchao with twenty-six armies.
Several hundred men of Li Jue, armed with great halberds, were marching in front of the imperial carriage, and the two groups were about to fight when the Palace Attendant Liu Ai called out in a loud voice, "This is the Son of Heaven!"
Chen Ji became General of the Household for All Purposes and Han Rong became Minister Herald.
Yuan Shu had sent Sun Jian to attack Dong Zhuo, but before he returned Yuan Shao appointed Zhou Ang of Kuaiji as Inspector of Yu province, and Zhou Ang attacked and captured Sun Jian's basecamp at Yangcheng.
Fan Pang went to pay a courtesy call upon Huo Xu, but made no formal thanks [for Huo Xu's memorial of support].
Zhang Wen said, "Dong Zhuo has a fine reputation in all the territory between the Yellow River and the Long Mountain. If I kill
and Gongsun Zan brought his troops. He pretended that he was going to attack Dong Zhuo but then turned against Han Fu. Han Fu fought him but without success.
The Dowager replied, "There have been eunuchs since the very beginning of Han. It is only necessary to punish those who have committed crimes. How can we do away with all of them?"
Soon afterwards his condition improved, and he handed back the seal and ribbon [of that office].He was again appointed as a Regular Attendant, with position as Specially Advanced and salary at Fully Two Thousand shi.
Supuwan [i.e. Supuyan] the Shanyu of Liaodong fled with Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi to the Administrator of Liaodong, Gongsun Kang.
Bu Yang and Pan Hong, however, still had a strong following, and Du Shang wanted to continue the attack. His officers and men, however, satisfied with their achievements and concerned with their newly-acquired wealth, had no wish to fight further.
Guo Si gave a feast for the high ministers, and discussed an attack on Li Jue.
Liu Zhang agreed,and he sent Fa Zheng with four thousand men to invite Liu Bei.
The emperor remembered Fu Xie's memorial and did not punish him; but he did not enfeoff him either.
The HeadquartersOfficer Deng Xi protested to Liu Biao, but Liu Biao replied, "InsideI do not neglect the tribute to the throne and outside I do not turnmy back on the lord of our covenant. All the world can see that thisis right.
At the time of the Guandu campaign, Yuan Shao had Chen Linwrite his proclamation. Chen Lin accused Cao Cao of a multitude ofcrimes, even attacking his family and ancestors, and thoroughlyabused and slandered him.
Yuan Shao was afraid. He still held the seal and ribbon as the Administrator of Bohai,53 so he gave the insignia to Gongsun Fan, a distant younger cousin of Gongsun Zan, and sent him out to that commandery. Gongsun Fan, however, turned against Yuan Shao and brought the soldiers of Bohai to help Gongsun Zan.
Sun Quan had had two boxes made, intending them for the heads ofHuang Zu and Su Fei.
Ju Shou said to Yuan Shao, "You should send Jiang Qi out witha separate force to guard against Cao Cao's raids."
"Instead, however, you plan to lead the army away to theYangzi and the Han. If Yuan Shao collects the remnants of hisforces and attacks you from behind, you will be finished."
Zhang Yang said to the other leaders, "Service to the Son of Heaven should be shared by everyone in the empire. Since the court has excellencies and high officials, I shall go to defend against any threats from outside."
Later Wang Cheng died, and Li Xie arranged his funeral with full ceremony.At each of the four seasons he held sacrifices appropriate to one who was a most respected guest.
As Liu Xun came back to Pengze, Sun Ben and Sun Fuintercepted and defeated him.
Yuan Shu had sent Gongsun Yue to help Sun Jian attack Zhou Ang, but Gongsun Yue was hit by a random arrow and died.
"I ask now that you first execute those of your attendants who are greedy and corrupt, issue a complete amnesty for the men of Faction, and examine all the inspectors and heads of command-eries and kingdoms to see which are competent. After that, there will be no more trouble from rebels."
And now, if you do not take warning from the failures of the past but continue in the same way,
Mi Fang held the city [of Jiangling, capital of Nan commandery], but when Lü Meng showed Shi Ren to him, Mi Fang too opened his gates and surrendered.
Zhu Mu later took the opportunity of a court audience to make a speech on the same theme: "I have heard that the ancient regulations of the house of Han provided for only one man to be appointed to each post of Palace Attendant and Regular Attendant,to control the affairs of the Imperial Secretariat [the Masters of Writing]. Another man was appointed as Gentleman at the Yellow Gates, and his responsibility was to transmit memorials and messages. All these officers were selected from men of respectable family.
So Jiang Xu made plans with Zhao Ang and Yin Feng of hisown [Hanyang] commandery and with Li Jun of Wudu for a jointattack on Ma Chao. He also sent men to Ji city to make contact withLiang Kuan of Anding and Zhao Qu of Nan'an, to have them act asallies within.
In this year secondary marquisates were sold for five million cash.
In the autumn, in the eighth month Cao Cao brought an armyforward to Liyang, and ordered Zang Ba and his fellows to leadpicked men into Qing province to guard the east. He then set Yu Jinin camp by the Yellow River,
In the third month on the day yisi she was respectfully presented with the title of Xiaoren Empress, and lodged in the Palace of Perpetual Joy.
On the day jiazi [4 Jul] Li Jue arrested Wang Yu, Song Yi and Wang Hong and killed them.Wang Yun's wife and family died too.
In the ninth month an edict gave Cao Cao command as Governor ofJi province,
All other members of the Liang and Sun clans, inside and out, were arrested and sent to the imperial jails, then suffered public execution.No consideration was given to age or youth.Of others who were implicated, excellencies, ministers, colonels, provincial inspectors and other senior officials, scores of them died.
When that happens, you will be leading people who know what they are fighting for against a thoroughly disorganised enemy. You need only sit and wait for success to come."
Yet your majesty maintains still deeper hatred against me, and those in authority are as determined as ever before. "If I halt [my flight], I am caught and destroyed; if I continue to run, I remain a fugitive exile. Should I live, I am doomed to poverty; when I die, I shall be an unquiet ghost. Heaven is broad, but there is nowhere to conceal myself; Earth is wide, but there is no place to take refuge. I tramp the hard ground, and yet feel I drown in [54] troubled waters; I keep away from precipitous cliffs, yet I have a frightening sense of being crushed beneath a great weight.
The borders were peaceful and the people spread across the cultivated land.Liang Xi encouraged farming and gave advice on mulberry-growing. Whatever he ordered was done and whatever he forbade was stopped.
Yuan Shao refused, and became angry with him. He abolished JuShou's command and gave it to Guo Tu.
Only Shentu Pan, when he received the order of summons and was urged to go, simply laughed. In the end Dong Zhuo could not compel him. He was more than seventy, and he died of old age.
Ma Chao had lost his base and had nowhere to move, but thenhe made a surprise attack on Li city and captured Jiang Xu's mother.
Shi Xie was a tolerant and generous man, and many gentlemenfrom central China came to him.
They used chalk to write the characters jiazi on the walls and gates of the capital city, of the offices and on the yamen of the provincial and commandery administrations.
Yuan Shu had his senior commanders Zhang Xun and Qiao Rui joinforces with Han Xian and Yang Feng.19 With tens of thousands ofhorsemen and footsoldiers they advanced swiftly on Xiapi andattacked Lü Bu in seven separate columns.
About this time the sun went down, and Yuan Shu set fire to the Gate Engraved in Blue of the Southern Palace to drive Zhang Rang and the others out.
Yuan Shao was a man of strong build, with an air of authority. He admired men of breeding, and was a patron to those who became celebrated. Guests and clients assembled about him, and cloth-covered carriages [of the wealthy] and simple wagons [of the poor] filled the streets [which led to his gate].
It was ordered that excellencies, ministers and junior officials should each send in sealed memorials.
Whenever Zhuge Liang went to Pang Degong's house he would go forward alone and make his bow at the foot of hisdivan.Pang Degong never objected.
Cai Yong begged his excuses: "Unworthy though I am, there are great principles which are constant from ancient times to the present, and I have heard and recited them too often to forget them. How could I work for Dong Zhuo and neglect my duty to the state?
I have spoken of that matter today; if I am punished for doing so, that would only fulfil a long-felt wish."
At the age of forty he became headman of Pu village.
Dong Zhuo himself remained at camp in the Jade Sceptre Park. He burned all the palaces and temples, government offices and private houses. Every building for two hundred li was destroyed, and not a dog or a chicken remained.
In the winter, in the tenth month the barbarians of Wuling rebelled and raided Jiangling [capital of Nan commandery].Li Su, the Administrator of Nan commandery, ran away.His Registrar Hu Shuang seized the bridle of his horse and protested, "The barbarians can see that the commandery has no preparations for defence against them, so they are only too eager to take advantage of such an opportunity, and they will certainly attack."
My old friend Wu Ju is Administrator of Cangwu, replied Liu Bei. "I shall go and join him."
I was neither clever nor strongenough. It is fitting I should be taken."
Zhang Xian became ill and died. The people of Changsha set up his son Zhang Yi to succeedhim,
Liang Long and other men of Jiaozhi also rebelled, and they attacked and occupied several commanderies and counties.
In the intercalary [fifth] month on the day jirnao [4 Jul] the emperor sent the Supervisor of the Internuncios Huangfu Li to make peace between Li Jue and Guo Si.
Your majesty has inherited dominion from the restoration of Han, and you maintain the rule of Emperor Guangwu.You hold court and you attend to government, but you have not yet made full use of your sage-like understanding.
In the eighth month there was a comet in the Heavenly Market.
Guo Tai understood all types of men, he enjoyed praising or admonishing them, and he would travel about the commanderies and kingdoms.
Lü Bu then took the edict-block from his breast and used it to take command of the troops, saying, "The order requires that Dong Zhuo be executed, and that is all. For the rest, there are no questions asked."
Chen Lan and Mei Cheng, men of Lujiang, occupied Qian and Liuin rebellion.
In the eighth month there were great rains, the Han River broke its banks and the whole plain was covered by water scores of feet deep.
Then Li Du brought Zhang Jian by side-roads to the house of Xi Ziran in Beihai, and from there he went to Yuyang and then across the frontier.
When Chengdu was under siege, Liu Bei promised his troops, "If we are successful, I have no account of what there may be in the treasury."
I am not the sort of person who seeks to sow discord. Itruly enjoy being a peace-maker."
With some thousand infantryand cavalry he went by forced marches to the relief. [206]
In the fifth month the Grand Commandant Wenren Xi and the Excellency of Works Xu Xu left office.In the sixth month, the Excellency over the Masses Liu Chong became Grand Commandant, the Minister of Ceremonies Xu Xun became Excellency over the Masses, and the Minister Coachman Liu Ao of Changsha became Excellency of Works.
"Yet those in authority have on several occasions neglected their duties and failed to carry out these ceremonies, giving some such excuse as the mourning period for a subordinate state, the birth of a child within the imperial palace, the illness or death of some junior official.10 Forgetting the importance of ritual and respect, they give attention to works on taboo and avoidance, and they injure the grand canon for reasons which are merely petty.
"Lu Su is loyal and a man of noble spirit. He will never shirkresponsibility. Let him take my place.
"And yet some petty fellows have put forward arguments to confuse your sage understanding, causing you to raise your majestic wrath, equal to that of Heaven, against these two men. Surely the punishment they have received is already excessive.
The Wuhuan had taken advantage of the disturbances in the empire, and made raids which kidnapped more than a hundred thousand Chinese families. Yuan Shao had set up their chief men as Shanyu, and he pretended that the daughters of his personal followers were his own children, and gave them away as wives for the barbarian chiefs.
Through a clear decision of the sage-like court, accepting my foolish words, my strategy was put into effect and Zhang Huan's advice was not taken.
In the sixth month WEI named the Master of the Army Hua Xin as Royal Counsellor.
On his way home, Cheng Yu passed by Fan and spoke to the magistrate Jin Yun, "I have heard that Lu Bu holds your mother and your younger brother, your wife and your children. As a filial son, how can you bear this?
If I slander him in return, and confuse your sage hearing, that would be no advantage to anyone."
The Dowager Dou was transferred to the Southern Palace,and the [surviving] dependents of Dou Wu's family were exiled to Rinan.All officials, from the excellencies and ministers downwards, who had been recommended by Chen Fan and Dou Wu or who had been their former officers and students, were now dismissed and proscribed from office.
Mao Jie the Deputy Director of the Secretariat felt that Cui Yanhad been unjustly punished, and he was most upset.
I ask that you instruct your officers to pay him no attention." Then he raised troops and attacked Li Shu in Huan city.
Qiu Xiang was very surprised, and said, "Just recently I went by Chen Yuan's house, and the buildings were in good order and the fields were at the right stage of the season's work."This man is not wicked, it is simply that his moral training has been lacking.
Liu He, son of Liu Yu, was a Palace Attendant. The emperor was hoping to return to the east, and he ordered Liu He to make his escape from Dong Zhuo, go out in secret through the Wu Pass, and take a message to Liu Yu that he should lead troops to come and receive the emperor.
Lü Bu set a man to strum music in his tent, but he himself went into hiding. During the night, the men of the escort got up and hacked the tent and coverlets and destroyed everything inside.
Yang Biao said, "You have no concern for the good of the state. Why should I live?"
Some of Cao Cao's officers asked him, "You went back, and then Gongsun Kang beheaded Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi. How did you arrange it?"
but Jiao Chu said,"Great affairs must be founded on justice, and a single man willmake no difference to whether we succeed or fail. Let him hold tohis principles, for he is an example of loyal service to us all."
The first thing is to take Huang Zu.
Zhou Yu had been attacking Cao Ren [in Jiangling] for more than ayear, and a great many soldiers had been killed or wounded. At last,Cao Ren abandoned the city and fled.
"I was joking," said Cao Cao. "In fact we canhold out just one more month. What shall I do?"
[Before this] the Administrator of Wuwei had presumed on his high.position to indulge his lust and greed. Su Zhenghe of Wudu, an Assistant Officer of Liang province, sent in a report of his crimes,
Guo Si was going to take the emperor into his camp, but one of his soldiers deserted in the night
Cao Cao gave honours for the good work against Ma Chao: elevenmen were enfeoffed as marquises, and Yang Fu was awarded rankas a secondary marquis.
Taking up quarters in a simple hut, Huangfu Gui made regular inspection of his officers and men.All the troops appreciated his concern.
Wang Yun of Taiyuan, Inspector of Yu province, defeated the Yellow Turbans and obtained letters written to them from supporters and clients of Zhang Rang. He sent them to [190] the emperor.
Then Cao Cao sent Liu Bei with Zhu Ling to intercept YuanShu.60 Cheng Yu, Guo Jia and Dong Zhao all objected, "You can'tsend Liu Bei."
"Falsehood disrupts custom, selfishness destroys the law, unruli ness breaks controls, extravagance ruins good order. These are thefour harmful things, and no program of government can be carriedout until they have been eliminated.
After Yuan Shu had taken the imperial title, he acted mostextravagantly. His concubines and attendants were numbered by thehundreds, and they swathed themselves in silk and stuffedthemselves with millet and meat. The poor people were hungry anddistressed, but Yuan Shu took no thought for them.
Shan Chao and his colleagues replied, "It is true that there are wicked men and criminals in the state, and the day of their punishment is long due. But we ourselves are weak and of small ability, and we do not fully comprehend your majesty's sage-like thoughts.
For my own part, I have simply returned to my home country.I have impeached commandery administrators, I have broken up personal connections and family relationships, and I have put old friends to death and shame.It is not surprising that so many people have conspired to malign and slander me.
2 February 162 - 20 February 163
So Guan Yu felt quite easy in his mind. He had no further cause for suspicion, and he drew more and more soldiers away to Fan.
Whenever there was fighting, however, he would returnthe command to Gao Shun. Despite this, Gao Shun had no feeling ofresentment.
On the day gengshen [7 Oct] the emperor went out east by theHuanyuan Pass, and the capital was shifted to Xu city.
Ma Chao fled south to Zhang Lu.Zhang Lu appointed Ma Chao as Libationer Expositor.
Sun Ce gave a great laugh and said, "I will share all my planswith you.
The mother is a widow and has cared for the orphan son. She is now growing old and frail. How can she truly want to abandon years of the toil of upbringing for a single burst of anger? "Moreover, the mother has cared for this son whom her husband left to her. If she fails to carry out this duty, and supposing the dead have consciousness, then even if she lives a hundred years how will she face her man?"
When Liu Bei went east he passed Moling,14 and he too urgedSun Quan to live there.
Secretly, Yuan Shu wanted the throne for himself, but he realised that it would become difficult if the state had a strong ruler. As a result, he argued, on the best principles, against the proposal.
Zhang Cheng of Henei was an expert at divination by the wind. He calculated that there was going to be an amnesty, so he told his son to kill a man.
"And there are some who have never set brush to paper on any official document, and who do not understand the art of rhetoric, but get other people to compose on their behalf. They corrupt and cheat all proper procedures; yet each receives your imperial favour. They are false as an empty cicada skin, fallen in the dirt.
In the spring, in the second month, Zhao Ci, a soldier in Jiangxia, led a mutiny and killed the Administrator of Nanyang, Qin Jie.
Some of Wang Yun's Assistant Officers thought to bring matters to a crisis point, and with tears in their eyes they came to offer him a draught of poison.
Man Chong made no reply, but carried out the investigation infull accordance with the law.
Rebels of Cangwu and Guiyang attacked the commandery and county offices. The Administrator of Lingling, Yang Xuan, prepared several dozen horse-drawn carriages, loaded them with baskets of quicklime, and tied strips of cloth to the horses' tails. He also constructed war chariots, with archers and crossbow-men.
So he led his soldiers west, intending to occupy Chenggao, and Zhang Miao sent his officer Wei Zi with a detachment of troops to follow him.
each [414] with appointment in adifferent place, and have someone like me hold them down andmake them fight for us. If we do that, the great affair can be settled.
Then Xu Huang and his fellows became angry, and they raised again the former questions [of the slanders against Huangfu Gui].He was sent down for judicial enquiry.
Liu Bei was delighted with this, and he led all his officers into Hanzhong. He sent Zhang Fei, Ma Chao, Wu Lan and others to camp at Xiabian.
but now that Dong Zhuo was destroyed he believed he had nothing more to worry about and began to act arrogantly. None of his subordinates felt any particular loyalty to him.
We should be thinking of the qualities that the Guanju Ode requires, and we must avoid the dangers named in the Five Prohibitions.
"The most important thing in setting up government is to record men's good work and to be forgetful of their faults.
Summons were sent to Xun Shuang, Chen Ji, Han Rong and Shentu Pan, scholars of local reputation who had yet received no official rank.
In the summer, in the fourth month on the day jiayin [17 May] there was a fire in the temple apartments of the funerary park of Anling [the tomb of Emperor Hui of Former Han].
Abandoning his wife and children, Liu Bei fled with Zhuge Liang, Zhang Fei, Zhao Yun and a few score horsemen. Cao Cao captured all his army and his baggage.
f only your majesty would keep slanderers and men of flattery at a distance, and hold close to men that are honest.Then the omen of disaster may be averted."
"When Tian Feng heard you had retreated," replied Pang Ji, "heclapped his hands and laughed aloud. He was pleased that thingshad turned out as he foretold."
Then Cao Cao ordered Man Chong the Prefect of Xu toinvestigate Yang Biao.43 Both Kong Rong and the Director of theSecretariat Xun Yu said to Man Chong, "Just take down what hesays. Do not examine him by flogging."
In former days, replied Wang Yun, "Emperor Wu failed to kill Sima Qian, and so allowed him to write a book of slander which was assed down to later times.
If Zhai Chao confiscated Hou Lan's property wrongfully, and Huang Fu was in error to execute Xu Xuan, nevertheless in both cases a punishment has been applied, and they have not benefited from the provisions of any amnesty.
Since the Yanping period [of Emperor Shang, 106],they have steadily increased their power and influence.Adorned with jewellery and furs, they occupy formal positions of close attendance,15 and everything at court passes through their hands.
Removing his bonds, he took his hand and said, "Remember that timeat Shenting?29 Had you taken me then, what would have happened?"
Su Zhenghe went to thank He Xun, but He Xun refused to see him, saying, "I gave my advice on behalf of Commissioner Liang, not for Su Zhenghe."
When the powerful heard of this, they were all extremely nervous,
So the courtiersslandered him to Liu Biao. Knowing how Ni Heng had behaved in the past, they told Liu Biao that, "Ni Heng praises your humanity,saying the Lord of the West could not surpass it, 60 but he thatbelieves you cannot make decisions, and for this reason you willultimately fail."
When Sima Yi was young he was already intelligent and had ambitious plans.
"Lord Cao had come to attack you, nothing had gone wrongwith his plans and he was still at full strength. When he drew backso quickly, therefore, it could only have been for some reason of hisstate.
When he returned to Cao Cao, he praised Zhou Yu's conduct and hishigh abilities: a man whom words could never lead astray.
Li Jue recruited as he marched, and by the time he came to Chang'an he had more than a hundred thousand men. He joined Fan Chou and Li Meng, former followers of Dong Zhuo, and laid siege to the city. The walls were too steep to be stormed, and the defences held out for eight days.
The Administrator Wang Yu said to Du Mi, "Liu Jiling is an honest and high-minded gentleman. Many of the most senior officials have recommended him to me."
The Regular Attendant Lu Qiang was honest and loyal, concerned for the public good. In a general issue of enfeoffments, the emperor granted him the marquisate of a chief district, but Lu Qiang firmly refused and sent in a memorial explaining his position: "I have heard of the great covenant of Gaozu, that a subject who has not achieved good work should not be enfeoffed. This was to give proper importance to imperial fiefs and to provide clear warning [against unworthy grants].
While they were still two hundred li short, the enemy realised was happening.
to him, "To raise the forces east of the Yangzi, to decide theopportunities between two battle-lines and to fight for supremacy inthe empire; in that you are not as good as I am. To raise the worthyand give appointment to able men, so that each gives all his effortsto keep the east of the Yangzi; in that I am not equal to you."
When Gao Gan was dead, Xun Yu recommended Zhongchang Tong as a Gentleman of the Masters of Writing.
Then Wenji said to Wang Cheng, a client of her father [Li Gu], "You served our late father well, and you possess the ancient code of loyalty. Now I entrust you with an orphan boy, [a stripling] just six feettall.3 The preservation or destruction of the Li family rests in your hands!"
The officers submitted lists of of all those in camp. Zhao Yan looked through them and immedi ately made his selection.
After a few weeks Lü Bu was in serious trouble. He called fromthe wall to one of Cao Cao's men, "If you do not force me todesperation, I shall surrender to your excellent master."
Cao Cao at this time had captured Jing province and put Liu Bei to flight, and he did not receive Zhang Song with proper courtesy.
Since the time of the three dynasties, the beauty of Teaching and Custom had never reached to the bloom of Eastern Han.
Then Chong Gao removed the beacon-fires and observation posts, and the frontier regions were peaceful and free from fear.Chong Gao was called back to the capital to become Minister of Finance.
"I have only just arrived in a strange territory," replied Liu Bei,"and have not yet shown my grace and good faith. I cannot dothat."
"Besides, Liu Zhang and I belong to the same clan, and we hope to use the authority and inspiration of our ancestors to revive the house of Han.
Cao Cao's forces have come a long way, and they are exhausted and distressed. I have heard that when they chased after Yuzhou their light cavalry travelled more than three hundred li in a single day and night. This is what is meant by the proverb, 'The last flight of a strong crossbow cannot pierce plain silk from Lu,'
Yang Qiu also bribed the local authorities to kill Cai Yong by poison, but they too warned Cai Yong. So he was able to escape assassination.
When Duke Ai increased the taxes, Confucius himself disapproved. It is surely even worse to seize people's property in order to make these useless statues. You would be ignoring the warnings of the sages and will be following the mistaken conduct of weak rulers."
Wait and see what other provinces do. If they take action you can join them,
Zhang Lu was officially a man from Pei, but the leadership of the Five Dou of Rice sect had been with his family since the time of his grandfather Zhang Ling, and they had migrated to live in Shu.
In the autumn, in the seventh month the Excellency of Works Sheng Yun became Excellency over the Masses, and the Minister of Ceremonies Yu Fang became Excellency of Works.
The reason I know this is from the occasion he arranged a feast for some people of the province. When midday came, there was no food to be had and more than a dozen guests had to make their apologies and leave. Like a dwarf's performance on the stage, once you have seen part of his act, you immediately know the rest."
When Yuan Shao died, all the people wanted to set up Yuan Tan,since he was the eldest son.
"I am forty-six years old. My one interest in life is to maintain my name as a loyal minister, and from this point of view death holds many attractions. My only regret would be that your majesty will never again hear honest advice."
Cao Cao appointed Xing Yong an Assistant Officer of Ji province.
Cao Cao was angry and was going to have him arrested. Sima Yi was frightened and took the post.
In the summer, in the fourth monthCao Cao brought his army forward to the Yellow River, and sent hisgenerals Shi Huan and Cao Ren across to attack him.
If I surrender to Cao Cao, he will send me back to my home district, to be graded for name and rank, and at the very least I would become a junior Assistant Officer. So I would ride in a carriage drawn by oxen, with an escort of soldiers, and could mingle with the gentry. Then I would be promoted and in the end I would be sure to finish with a province or a commandery.
Cao Cao thought again of Tian Chou's good work, and was sorry he that he had allowed him to refuse all honours. "It may have pleased the man himself," he remarked, "but it means the royal laws lack their full effect."
Zhang Wen led more than a hundred thousand men, horse and foot collected from several different commanderies, and set his camp at Meiyang. Bian Zhang and Han Sui also brought their troops to Meiyang, and Zhang Wen fought with them there, but he often failed to gain the advantage.
Someone criticised him for this omission, but Fan Pang replied, "In ancient times, Shuxiang did not call upon Qi Xi.How could I give thanks to Huo Xu?"
He extended military colonies and repaired the embank ments and dams. People were able to store up supplies,
53 of the Chronicle o^f Han Xingping 1: 194 AD
The Regular Attendants Zhang Rang and Duan Gui said to one another, "The General-in- Chief said that he was ill. He did not attend the mourning, and he did not accompany the funeral.Now he comes suddenly to the palace; what does this mean?
With Dong Min, therefore, Commandant of the Imperial Equipage and younger brother of Dong Zhuo, Wu Kuang led his men against He Miao. They killed him and left his body in the park.
Then, however, in a single night Cao Cao dug it further, twenty feetwide and twenty feet deep, and he brought in the water of the ZhangRiver. More than half the people in the city died from starvation.
Zhang Fei shouted at Yan Yan MWhen a great army comes, why do you not surrender? How dare you fight against us?"
Now the reason for the rebellions of the Qiang was that they had been oppressed and wrongly persecuted by the administrators of the commanderies and counties. The reason they had been able to rebel and had not been promptly suppressed was that the military commanders were incompetent.
"Our lord may seem lenient," replied Tian Feng, "but he neverforgets. He does not value my loyalty, and I have several timesangered him with advice or warning. Had he won, he would havebeen pleased and might have forgiven me. But now the battle is lostand he is angry. It will bring back all his hidden resentment, and Ido not expect to live."
Deng Wanshi the Intendant of Henan and Deng Hui the General of the Household Rapid as a Tiger were both sent to jail and executed.
You are the senior general. If you exercise the authority of the state to punish him, you will be displaying brilliant loyalty above, and you will be wiping out evil and harm below. Such a plan cannot fail."
If a sage ruler is set up in the east, then we may hope for great peace. How can you still have doubts?
He also wrote to Dou Wu and to Chen Fan, warning them that the stars and constellations were confused and misleading, not favourable to great ministers, and they should take swift action to determine their great plans.
In the ninth month the barbarians of Jiangxia made a rebellion. The provincial and commandery forces attacked and pacified them.
"Considerably worse," answered Hua Xin.
When that is done, let the empire decidethe rights and wrongs. Surely that is the honourable way to behave."
The remnants of Hu Lan's band fled south into Cangwu, where the Inspector of Jiaozhi Zhang Pan attacked and defeated them. They turned back into Jing province.
Ju Shou was unable to cross with Yuan Shao. Caught by Cao Cao'smen, he cried out loud, "I do not surrender, I [290] have beencaptured!" Cao Cao knew him from before, and greeted him, "Wehave been separated under different mansions of the stars, and it islong since our paths have crossed.48 It is quite unexpected that weshould have taken you today." "Ji province [Yuan Shao] made bad plans," replied Ju Shou,"and he brought defeat upon himself.
"As their men-at-arms suffer defeat outside, and their ministersof counsel are killed within,16 the brothers slander and quarrel withone another. Their state is divided in two, and they have been in thissituation for a whole year. Their soldiers' clothes have lice, there isdrought, there are locusts, and there is famine everywhere. Suchdisasters from Heaven above reflect the chaos afflicting the affairsof men below. Anyone can see that they are done for. Now is thetime Heaven has abandoned Yuan Shang.
Liu Bei recommended Sun Quan as Acting General of Chariotsand Cavalry with command as Governor of Xu province.
Another time, as Cao Cao was leaving on campaign Cao Pi and Cao Zhi were both in attendance for the ceremony of departure. Cao Zhi spoke most elegantly of his father's merit and virtue, all turned to admire him, and Cao Cao was pleased.
When Yuan Shao heard that enemy troops had crossed theYellow River he immediately sent a detachment west to interceptthem.
"I was the only man to be a danger to Your Excellency,"explained Lü Bu, "and now I have submitted to you. Put me incharge of cavalry while you command the infantry, and the empirewill present no difficulties."
I wish to go privately, and with luck I may get through."
Then Sun Ce attacked Lujiang. Liu Yao heard about it, and because Wu Jing and Sun Ben had been appointed by Yuan Shu he was afraid the Yuan and Sun clans would join to plan against him. So he stirred up trouble, forcing Wu Jing and Sun Ben to leave,
I go to bed, but I cannot sleep; I eat but my stomach is only half filled. "I am truly concerned that your attendants [the eunuchs] become closer to you every day, and that the loyal words [of your ministers] steadily lose influence. Inside, troubles mount up. Outside, difficulties become constantly more serious.
There was an occasion that Guo Tai felt unwell, and he ordered Wei Zhao to prepare him some gruel.
Then Gao Rou's elder cousin Gao Gan invited him to come north of the Yellow River [into Ji province], so he took his family and went to join him.
As a result, he had enemies both inside and outside the court, and they joined to accuse him of bribing the Qiang in order to bring about a false surrender.The emperor sent a series of letters under seal to reprimand him.
The attendants broughthim to make the kowtow, but Jia Kui swore at them, "How can anofficer of the empire bow to a brigand?"
In this year, the [Xiongnu] Shanyu [Ju]che'er died. His son the Tuteruo shizhujiu Shanyu succeeded him.
The Dowager would not agree. "Since ancient times," she said, "it has been a custom of the house of Han that eunuchs control the forbidden apartments. You cannot do away with that.
Li Jue's wife, however, loved her son, so negotiations came to a halt.
Gongsun Zan, however, now presented a false allegation that Liu Yu had previously made plans with Yuan Shao that he should take the imperial title, and he compelled Duan Xun to have Liu Yu, his wife and children executed in the market-place at Ji.
and Cao Cao wanted to make the punishment heavier, while implicating also the fether, mother and brothers of any deserter.Gao Rou argued, however, "Deserters must certainly be puni shed. But I have heard that they often regret their action,
As Yuan Shao's army came south from the Yan Crossing, Cao Caohad his soldiers in camp under the southern slope.
There was a saying in the capital that "The father was unwilling to set up emperors, the son was unwilling to set up a king."
The Empress Liang [Nüying] placed great store upon the support she received from her elder brother [Liang Ji] and her elder sister [Liang Na, the Empress of Emperor Shun, now Empress-Dowager].She was quite unrestrained in her conduct and very extravagant, more so than any of her predecessors.She was also exceedingly jealous, so that [at first] none of the women of the palace could gain access to the emperor.
Cheng Yu also sent a detachment of cavalry to hold the CangtingCrossing, and when Chen Gong arrived he could advance no further.
Dong Zhuo came to Mianchi, and He Jin now became worried. He sent the Counsellor Remonstrant Chong Shao with an imperial order that he should halt.
Because of hisgreat reputation in the empire, Cao Cao pretended to be tolerant and agreeable, but he thoroughly disliked it.
"The leaders within the passes," replied Xun Yu, "are numberedby the score. No-one can bring them together. Han Sui and Ma Tengare the only strong ones,
Xun You said, "Our men are too few to match the enemy.In order to win, you must divide our opponents' strength.
Li Le said, "The situation is serious. Your majesty should get on a horse."
When Sun Quan heard the news he mourned and said, "Gongjinhad the ability to assist a true King, and yet he has died so young.Whom can I rely upon now?" He went in person to Wuhu toaccompany the funeral.
To the south of the city there were bandits who had attacked people, and to the north was a woman who had killed her child.
Taking ten ships of war,he filled them with tinder grass anddried wood, poured oil inside, then covered them with tent curtains and set up flags. He also prepared light fast boats and fastened them to the sterns.
Before this, the Administrator of Wu commandery, Sheng Xian ofKuaiji, had recommended Gao Dai as Filial and Incorrupt.
The Dowager muffled her sobs and the ministers restrained their grief. None dared speak.
A general council was held among the leaders east of the passes. It was observed that the emperor was young and weak, under thecontrol of Dong Zhuo. Far away and isolated by the passes, they did not even know whether he was still alive. Liu Yu, Governor of You province, was worthy and able and a member of the imperial clan.1It was therefore proposed that he be set up as ruler.
"Guo Gong knows almost nothing about Zhang Miao's party,"replied Xun Yu, "for they have had little to do with each other in the past. He has only recently arrived, and has surely not made up his mind what to do. If I talk with him while he is still uncertain, then even if I cannot get him to join us, I may at least persuade him to stay neutral.
Jiang Jijiang said, "My elder brother's virtues and his age are far greater than mine. He is the treasure of our family and a leader of the nation. Let me receive your blows, but I beg you to spare my brother's life."
Cao Shao, nephew of Cao Jie, was Administrator of Dong commandery, and he found some other pretext to arrest Xie Bi. Xie Bi was flogged to death in prison.
Guan Jing sighed and said, "Had I not persuaded the general tostay here, he might have saved himself.
"When I first received appointment, I believed we could do great things together to aid the imperial house.
Zhou Yu and the allies led a light-armed force to follow up the assault. They beat their drums with a mighty roar, and the northern army was utterly smashed.
Cao Cao collected five thousand men who had formerly served Han Sui, Ma Chao and the other generals [of the northwest], and he put them under the command of Yin Shu, as General Who Pacifies Disorder. The Administrator of [You]fufeng,
There is no difficulty about planning the affair,"they replied. "We are only concerned that your majesty may still have some doubts of your own."
Xu Shu said to him, "Zhuge Kongming is a sleeping dragon. Would you like to meet him?"
"You have always given loyal service, but you have notcommitted your full strength. You have private contacts with bothsides, and you hope to sit back and watch the result.
Turning to Liu Bei he said, "Xuande, you are a guest in a high place and I am a prisoner. These ropes aretight. Will you not speak a word for me?"
Cao Caoreported that, "Zhao Wen has recommended a junior member of my family. His judgement cannot be trusted." He had the emperor dismiss him.
Instead, however, Yan Wen faced the city and called out,"A great army will be here in no more than three days. Fight yourhardest until it comes." Everyone in the city wept for joy and criedout: "Ten thousand years!"
While Cao Cao's army advanced towards Ruxu, Xun Yu [440]stayed behind at Shouchun because he was sick. He drank a potionand died.
but Liu Zhang said, "Father and son, my family has been in this province for more than twenty years, yet we have shown the people neither grace nor virtue.
When Liu Zhang gave him the commission, Fa Zhengmade many excuses to avoid the mission, so that Liu Zhang wouldbelieve he was going only because he had been ordered to.
He brought a great number of the celebrated gentlemen of the empire to appointment: both Chen Fan and Li Xian, his former subordinates, had risen to share in his rank as excellency.
then I fear the difficulties of the Second Emperor [of Qin] will surely come again, and the treachery of Zhao Gao may re-appear at any moment.
Liu Bei appointed Jiang Wan of Lingling magistrate of Guangdu.
Gan Ning was expert with bow and arrows. Commanding his own men in the rearguard, he shot Ling Cao and killed him.So Huang Zu was able to escape.
Just at this time Cao Cao sent a letter to Sun Quan, "I have lately received an imperial command to attack all criminals. My standards point to the south, and Liu Zong has bound hands.
Besides, the men in the siege do not know there is a relief force on the way, and I suspect their supplies may be low enough to worry them.
Huang Zu had ordered his Chief Controller Chen Jiu to lead his fleet into battle,
In this region we have both a hidden dragon and a young phoenix."
Li Su threatened Hu Shuang with a sword, saying, "Get out of my way, sir!
Three chieftains of the Wuhuan in Dai commandery had all styled themselves Shanyu. Relying upon their strength, they acted arrogantly and wilfully, and the Administrator could not keep them under control.
"In former times, King Wen had only one wife, but she bore him ten sons. Now the women of your palace are numbered by the thousands, but I have not heard that any of them have become pregnant.
The soldiers from the west and the barbarianscame in groups to watch. Cao Cao laughed and said to them, "Youwant to see Lord Cao? He is just like other men. He does not havefour eyes or two mouths, just a bit of intelligence."When they parted, Ma Chao and the others questioned Han Sui,"What did you talk about?" "Nothing worth repeating," he replied.
Yan Rou of Yan state had earlier been generous and faithful, and he became Major to the Wuhuan. Recruiting several ten thousand barbarians and Han Chinese, Yan Rou fought a battle to the north of Lu against Zou Dan, the Administrator of Yuyang appointed by Gongsun Zan. He took the head of Zou Dan and killed four thousand of his men.
Thinking little of Qu Yi's small force, Gongsun Zan sent horsemen to drive them away.
Cao Cao was a strict man, and his officials were sometimesbeaten. He Kui always kept poison by him, swearing he wouldrather die than suffer such disgrace, but it never came to that point.
Cheng Yu replied, "That policy was developed in time oftrouble and was never more than a temporary expedient.
Bian Zhang and Han Sui would have been afraid of Zhou Shen's great force, and would have been cautious about committing themselves against Sun Jian, while Sun Jian's troops were strong enough to cut their line of supplies.
"When teaching and reform are abandoned, people of mediumquality are brought down to the level of petty fellows. Whenteaching and reform are maintained, such ordinary folk can bebrought to the Way of the gentleman. This is what is meant by'manifesting reform.'
In the summer, in the fifth month Duke Cao of WEI was raised in fief to become King.
"This [policy to move the emperor to Xu city] has been my aimfrom the beginning," replied Cao Cao.
Que Xuan of Xiapi collected a force of several thousand men and styled himself Son of Heaven. Tao Qian attacked and killed him.
Wang Rui, however, had quarrelled with the Administrator of Wuling, Cao Yin, and he announced that his first priority was to kill Cao Yin.
Northeast was a smaller platform, with nine umbrellas each ninety feet high.
Han Fu received one of the letters and asked the members of his staff, "Do we support the Yuan clan or the Dong?"
Then Wei Gu said, "If we kill Du Ji it will be no loss to CaoCao, but will simply give us a bad name. In any case, I know that Ican keep him in hand."
Zhang Song urged Liu Zhang to ally with Liu Bei. "Whomcan I send?" asked Liu Zhang, and Zhang Song recommended [429]Fa Zheng.
When his treasure was assessed, it filled more than three hundred wagons, all laden with gold and silver, brocade and silk.
You will be perfectly secure, and can look for yet greater things."
When Ma Chao learnt of this he was very angry, and Zhao Qutricked him into going out immediately to attack them.
Liu Yu had previously been Inspector of You province, the barbarians and the people had admired his grace and honesty, and so he was given the post.
He should be sober and anxious, but instead he rejoices. How can this last long?
An edict ordered the excellencies, ministers and colonels to recommend Worthy and Good, Sincere and Upright men [as candidates for office.]
Then Liu Biao also called him up, and he moved away to Chanling.
The Shibao prophecies are superstitious, apocryphal works. How can one trust them?"
Seven armies under Yu Jin and his colleagues were flooded out. Yu Jin and his men climbed high ground to avoid the water, and Guan Yu's soldiers sailed in great ships to attack them. Utterly exhausted, Yu Jin and his followers surrendered.
Lü Bu had only threethousand infantry and four hundred horse, and he was afraid hecould not deal with them. He said to Chen Gui, "This is your work,to bring on Yuan Shu's army. What shall I do now?"
The case has now been under investigation for a whole year, but not one piece of firm evidence has been discovered.
Fan Pang, however, heard about this, and said, "This must be something to do with me."
As Cen Zhi made his escape, all his family and friends joined to help conceal him. Only Jia Biao closed his door and refused to take him in. Some were angry with him,
When Zhang Lu heard that Yangping had fallen, he wanted to surrender. Yau Pu, however, advised him, "If you go now, under pressure, you will gain no great credit. The best thing to do is join [the barbarian leaders] Duhu and Fuhu. Oppose Cao Cao together, then send tribute. He will be all the more pleased when you do submit."
Huangfu Song was recalled, his seal and tassel as General of Chariots and Cavalry on the Left were taken away, and the value of his fief was reduced by six thousand households.
If we accept their surrender, it will not encourage the people to practise virtue; [189] but if we kill them it will be sufficient warning for everyone to avoid evil conduct.
During the reign of Emperor Ling the inspectors of provinces and the heads of commanderies and kingdoms were greedy as jackals and tigers, oppressing the people in most cruel and ruthless fashion; yet that was the time the court maintained the Law of Three Relationships.
When Lü Meng came to the capital, Sun Quan asked him, "Who could take your place?"
3 174 AD
Cao Cao, moreover, is extremely good at usingsoldiers, and you can never tell what he will do next.
and I was the man who killed Dong Zhuo. Since I came east, however, not one of the leaders there has treated me well, and all seek to kill me."
Zhang Huan sat quietly in his quarters with his attendants, talking and reading aloud from texts, as if nothing out of the ordinary was taking place, and his men gradually ceased to panic.
In the fifth month the Minister of the Guards Liu Kuan became Grand Commandant.
Gongsun Du wanted to appoint Wang Lie as his Chief Clerk, but Wang Lie refused.He became a merchant in order to degrade himself, and by this means he escaped the summons.
but Liu Yao replied, "If I appointed Ziyi [Taishi Ci], Xu Zijiang [Xu Shao] would laugh at me."
Duke Cao of WEI welcomed him and appointed him as General Who Maintains the South in Peace, treating him with the courtesy of a guest. He enfeoffed him as Marquis of Langzhong with an appanage of ten thousand households,
Tanshihuai refused to accept, and he raided and plundered all the more fiercely.
"Even if Yan province is lost, you still have three cities and at least ten thousand fine soldiers. With your military genius, and with Wenruo [Xun Yu] and me and others to gather men for your service, you may yet become hegemon. Please think again."
"Again, the former Administrator of Shanyang Zhai Chao, and the former Chancellor of Donghai Huang Fu, both have a heavy sense of responsibility. They hate evil like a personal enemy.
Gathering some remnants of his forces, he went east against Guangling. He fought with Yuan Shu, suffered further defeat, and went to camp at Haixi.
HHS 8:332 (3b-4a), the Annals of Emperor Ling,Jianning 4: 171 AD 23 February 171 - 11 February 172
Liu Bei collected troops, and gained over ten thousand men. Lü Buwas concerned at this and he in turn now led soldiers against LiuBei.
Zhang Liao said, "Our lord is on campaign far away, and by the time help comes the enemy will surely have destroyed us.
Your majesty should issue a clear edict for the arrest of Zhang Jue and his supporters, with rewards of land from the state for those who capture them. If any dare evade your call, they can share the same punishment."
Tadun, the Wuhuan of Liaoxi, was particularly powerful and had been very well-treated by Yuan Shao. Yuan Shang and his brothers therefore turned to him for support, and he made several incursions across the borders in hope of helping Yuan Shang regain his former territory.
Provincial and commandery offices followed the lead, and some men who had no connection with the matter nonetheless shared a miserable fate. As a result of this new inquisition, another six or seven hundred people died or were exiled or dismissed or proscribed from office.
Fu Gan said to him, "Men of the past had the saying: 'He whoaccords with virtue will prosper, and those who oppose virtue willlose.'
Cao Cao came forward to Ye and made hills and tunnelsto attack it.
You may be master on the inside, and I shall be your ally abroad. I have suppliesand you have troops, we complement each other. Live or die, let usact together."
Later Jiang Ji came with dispatches to Ye, and when Cao Caoreceived him he gave a great laugh, said, "I wanted only to keep thepeople safe from the enemy, but instead I drove them away!" Henamed Jiang Ji Administrator of Danyang.
and the Excellency over the Masses Chen Dan sent in a memorial: "The Excellency and the Minister bias their reports, whether of praise or blame, to favour their own faction. This is like setting loose the kite and caging the phoenix."
The Consultant Ba Su of Bohai had been involved at an early stage with Dou Wu's plans. Cao Jie and his colleagues did not know about it, so he was only proscribed from office. Later they found out, however, and orders were given for his arrest.
Liu Bei sent Huang Zhong, General Who Exterminates Caitiffs, to charge the enemy from above with drums and war-cries, andXiahou Yuan's army was utterly defeated. They took the head of Xiahou Yuan and also that of Zhao Yong, the Inspector of Yi province [appointed by Cao Cao].
and Zheng Baocame to pay his respects to the messenger. Liu Ye kept them for afeast,
Now the assorted barbarians in the various directions may have natures that are different [to the Chinese],but they still seek for advantage and would avoid harm, they love life and they hate death. In this, they are the same as other men.
Yuan Shao then went north through the mountains. He attacked the bandit Zuo with the Eighty-foot Moustache, beheading him with all his followers.
At this time, however, the proscription of the men of Faction extends to the five degrees of relationship. This does not accord with the words of the canon, and it is in conflict with the established and regular models of conduct."
Liu Yu's Assistant Officer Xianyu Fu of Yuyang, with a group of others, gathered the troops of the province and led an army of vengeance.
and formerly I would have said that the rituals of the present dynasty could well be reduced.Now that I have seen the splendour of the ceremony, however, I can appreciate the true feeling of filial piety that was shown by Emperor Ming [when he instituted the ritual].
Before this, when Liu Bei was still in Jing province, Zhou Yu, Gan Ning and others had often urged Sun Quan to take over SHU.
Chong Shao and his fellow-conspirators were found out and fled to Huaili.
Yin Shu was in command of the transfer, but the men were unhappy when the order was given to move. Zhao Yan escorted them as fer as the Yegu Pass,but as soon as he went back, and even before they had reached their camp, Yin Shu's troops mutinied.
Ju Jun, Colonel of the Archers Who Shoot at a Sound, was wounded and fell from his horse. Li Jue asked his attendants, "Will he live?"
Feng Gun then went forward to attack the Wuling barbarians, and took more than four thousand heads.He received the surrender of a hundred thousand enemies, and Jing province was pacified and settled.
An imperial edict appointed Zhang Huan, Commandant of the Dependent State of Anding, to be General of the Household in the North,to attack the Xiongnu, the Wuhuan and the other barbarians.
So he went with Lu Su to Sun Quan.
"A man who cannot be satisfied," remarked Cao Cao, "will get Long and look to Shu."
The Duke of Zhou did not look for everything in one man, so I disregard Lu Su's shortcomings and remember only his greatness. I always compare him to Deng Yu.
At my age of eighty years, I wish to remove this danger from you. I recommend that you take the occasion of the eclipse as a reason to dismiss the eunuchs, in order to avert the omen from Heaven."
"You may have my head," replied Huo Jun, "but you cannot have the city."
In distress and despair, Wang Rui scraped gold and drank it and died.
According to ancient regulations, the relatives of servants in the palace are not permitted to occupy official posts or hold power [in the regular government structure].At the present time, however, kinsmen and clients [of eunuchs] are being openly appointed to office, and some young men without experience have been given important positions.Everyone is angry and resentful, and all the empire is anxious and perturbed.
For this reason people in the west admired the way that Zhuge Liang put the talents of all men into service.
Before he had got back to his own lines, however, Lu Bu himself appeared. From daybreak to sunset they were constantly engaged, and the battle was desperately even.
All the opinion of the empire was then hoping for some peace.
Before this, Wei Feng of Pei state had made a great show to impress people. Everyone at Ye admired his brilliance and the Chancellor of State of WEI Zhong Yao appointed him as Senior Clerk in the Department of the West.
It is my wish to admire goodness and share its purity, and I am prepared to share the disgrace of those who hate evil. I have spoken of certain things which I believe the imperial government should be aware of. I do not understand why this should be regarded as factionalism.
When Lu Bu arrived, Zhang Miao sent his follower Liu Yi to tell Xun Yu, "General Lu has come to assist Commissioner Cao in his attack on Tao Qian.You must quickly gather supplies for his army."
Now that the fightinghas halted on both sides, I shall not need many men. Thirty or fortywill be enough."
"When I first met Yuzhou [Liu Bei] at the Chang Slope, his forces were no more than a colonel's command, he was at the end of his resources and he was desperately worried. His hopes were down, his power was weak, and he was planning to creep off and go far away. He had totally lost heart.
"My lord and Yuan Shao are in a critical fight," replied LiTong, "and many commanderies and counties have turned away torebellion. If the silk is not collected and sent to the capital, thosewho hear of it will surely claim that my loyalty is suspect and that Iam waiting to see who wins."
Du Mi realised that Wang Yu was seeking to get some reaction from him, so he replied, "Liu Sheng may rank with the counsellors, and you may treat him as an honoured guest; but when he knows that a thing is good, he does not support it, and when he knows that something is bad he does not speak out. To conceal one's feelings and keep to oneself, dumb as a cicada in autumn, that is criminal.
Refusing to listen, Xiahou Dun and the others left Li Dianbehind as guard while they followed the chase. They did indeed fallinto an ambush and were thoroughly defeated.
and Yuan Tan planned togo back again to fight Yuan Shang. "Elder and younger brothers are like the right and left hands,"argued Wang Xiu.
He repeated his arguments again and again, his words were most earnest and sincere, and he even shed tears, but the emperor would not approve.
"Gongtai,' said Cao Cao to Chen Gong, "you always claimed toknow more than others, and now you end like this!"
About this time Yang Fu's wife died, so he went to Ma Chao andobtained leave to attend her burial.
On the day guisi [4 Jun] there was a great wind, rain and hail, and thunderbolts. More than a hundred large trees were uprooted.
Then Liu Bei sent his adopted son Liu Feng to follow the Mian River down from Hanzhong and take command of Meng Da's army to make a combined attack on Shangyong.The Administrator of Shangyong, Shen Dan, surrendered with all his commandery.
Zijing [Lu Su] was introduced to me by Zhou Yu. I spoke with him at a banquet and he talked of the great plan for imperial rule. This was one thing that caused me pleasure.
When the bandits heard of this they were very impressed, and they went to the brothers' lodging to pay their respects to 'their lord who has received an imperial summons.'They kowtowed and apologised for their behaviour, and returned everything they had taken.
Very fine, said Sun Quan. "Few men could be so generous."
Zuo Chang sent orders to He Xun and other outlying troops to come to help him. Xin Zeng and the other leaders were reluctant and hesitant, but He Xun said to them angrily, "In ancient times, when Zhuang Jia was late for his appointment Sima Rangju put him to the sword.
The Master of Writing Zhou Yong was a follower of Liang Ji, and used Liang Ji's authority for his own advantage.Later, when he saw that Liang Ji was in danger he made a great show of abusing him in order to show loyalty to you.As a result, by an immoral piece of trickery, he has also gained a marquisate.
At this time, moreover, the bandit of Taishan, Shusun Wuji, was ravaging Xu and Yan provinces, and neither the commandery nor the provincial offices could bring him to book.Shan Chao used this as a means to get Diwu Zhong into trouble, and Diwu Zhong was sentenced to exile in Shuofang.Dong Yuan, a junior kinsman of Shan Chao who was Administrator of Shuofang, was waiting for Diwu Zhong to come into his power so that he could take revenge
All replied, "That is not possible."
The emperor again flew into a rage.The chief officials now reported that [their conduct could be considered] Great Iniquity.
Then he got up and changed his clothes. Cao Jie was spying on him from behind, and he reported everything to his colleagues. As a result, the matter leaked out.
Cao Cao recommended Ma Teng as Minister of the Guards, while his son Ma Chao was appointed a Lieutenant-General with full command of his forces. All his family and dependents, however, were moved to Ye.
When the two documents were presented, each accusing the other, the court could do no more than temporise, replying to each in vaguely favourable terms, but making no decision.
Without Yang Feng, Han Xian was isolated. Accompanied by afew score horsemen, he sought to go back to Bing province, but hewas killed by Zhang Xuan the magistrate of Shuqiu.
Cao Cao realised that Yuan Tanwas not dealing honestly, but to set his mind at rest he had his sonCao Zheng take Yuan Tan's daughter in marriage, then led his armyback [south across the Yellow River].
It is obvious that the people could manage a hundred years without a currency of exchange, but they cannot last a single day if they are starved.
In the sixth month the Xianbi raided Liaodong.
Lord Cao supports the emperor and punishes cruelty andrebellion. His laws are clear and his government is ordered. Highand low follow his commands. You could say that he follows thetrue Way. "The Yuan, on the other hand, relying on their strength, turntheir backs to the royal commands and urge on barbarians tooppress China. One may well say that they oppose virtue.
Now, since the new emperor has not yet been established the affairs of government are daily more urgent. How can you gentlemen "rest and loll upon your couches," abandoning your responsibilities in this time of trouble? Is this your sense of honour?"
[In the summer] in the fifth month on the day jisi [24 Jun] there was an amnesty for the empire and the reign period was changed [to Xiping].
The General of the Household on the Left Cai Yong recommended that, "All the emperors since Xiao-He who possess the temple- name 'Exemplar' should have them removed, to show proper respect for the original tradition."
"Furthermore, if one man kills another he forfeits his life, and itis fitting, in accordance with the ancient institutions, that he shouldreceive harsh punishment. Sometimes, however, in a case of wound ing, though the criminal may have destroyed a man's body, hesuffers no more than having his hair cut off and his beard shaved.This is not the right pattern.
Someone said to Tian Feng, "You will now become important."
The eunuchs repeatedly claimed that quantities of material were not up to standard. Having forced the price down to just a tenth of its original cost, they then sold it on. Again, the eunuchs would delay acceptance of the goods, so that timber was left in heaps to rot and the palaces remained unfinished year after year.
In the twelfth month, several divisions of the Southern Xiongnu rose together in rebellion, and they joined with the Wuhuan and the Xianbi to ravage nine commanderies along the frontier.
In the ninth month the Excellency over the Masses Chunyu Jia, theGrand Commandant Yang Biao and the Excellency of Works ZhangXi all left office.
Liu Ao had always been a follower of the Regular Attendants, and it was for this reason that he came to rank among the excellencies.
About this time, a comet crossed the constellation of the Emperor's Seat,and the emperor privately asked Yuan Yan about it.Yuan Yan sent in a sealed reply, saying, "Your majesty has chosen to treat the Intendant of Henan Deng Wanshi, old companion of the years before you came to the throne, with favour greater than that of the excellencies and ministers, and with gracemore abundant than that shown to your own family.He is now enfeoffed as a marquis.When he attends court, you receive him [like an equal] and play board games with him.In this way the proper courtesies of rank are disrupted and you do harm to your prestige and authority.
The Lady Dou had bitterly resented this and now, even as the emperor's coffin was still at the front of the Hall, she killed Tian Sheng.
Before this, Yuan Shao had sent several messengers to ask Tian Chou in Wuzhong to enter his service, and he granted him the seal of a general so that he might hold the territory [in his service]. Tian Chou had always rebuffed him.
In the ninth month on the day gengxu [2 Nov] the emperor's sonswere enfeoffed: Liu Xi was made King of Jiyin, Liu Yi becameKing of Shanyang, Liu Miao became King of Jibei and Liu Dunbecame King of Donghai.
Liu Bei was defeated and fled to Cao Cao. Cao Cao received him generously, and appointed him Governorof Yu province.
As to the excellencies, ministers and great clans such as the Yuan, you can deal with them yourself. Why should I become involved there?"
Shan Yu, Inspector of Yi province, attacked and destroyed them.
Zuo Sheng, elder brother of Zuo Guan, was Administrator of Hedong.Zhao Qi of Jingzhao, who was magistrate of Pishi county, felt ashamed [to have such a man as his superior officer], and on that same day he left his position and returned to the west.
Cao Cao ordered his Major Xun Yu, with Cheng Yu the magistrateof Shouzhang, to guard Juancheng while he went once more to attack Tao Qian. Seizing territory as far as Langye and Donghai, he destroyed everything he passed.
Pang De apologised to him, but Zhong Yao replied"Guo Yuan was my nephew, but he was also an enemy of the state.Why apologise?" After this, the Southern Shanyu also surrendered.
Zhao Wei had gained the people's affections in the past. Takingadvantage of local resentment in Yi province, he made a rebellion,bringing tens of thousands of soldiers to attack Liu Zhang.
The Grand Commandant Chen Fan also argued that the Tian family was humble and insignificant, while the Dou were good family, and he supported them extremely strongly.
He took the gold and silver of the cities of SHU and distributed it among his officers as rewards, but he returned the grain and the cloth to their owners.
There were few soldiers and no reserves of food in the city, but Fu Xie held firm.
Cao Cao's forces were in total disarray, and the Colonel WhoPacifies the Caitiffs Yu Jin of Taishan was the only officer [213] to keep his men together and make an orderly retreat. On the way hecame across some Qingzhou troops engaged in looting. Yu Jin toldoff their crimes and attacked them.
The Colonel Who Settles Majesty, Lu Xun of Wu commandery, said to Sun Quan, "At the present time we need a great many soldiers if we are to defeat the enemy and settle disorder. Sheltered in deep and difficult country, the hills bandits have long been a source of trouble.
Dong Zhuo made himself Grand Commandant controlling the affairs of the General of the Van. He also took the Staff and Insignia, Battle-Axe, Ceremonial Axe and Gentlemen Rapid as Tigers, and changed his fief to become Marquis of Mei.
Yuan Shao was at this time by Qingshui in Chaoge. Zhao Fu and the others came up behind him with several hundred boats and a force of over ten thousand men, they set their weapons and drums in order and passed Yuan Shao's camp during the night. Yuan Shao was very annoyed.
If orders are sent to the provincial and commandery administrations to arrest him and punish him, I am afraid that might only increase the confusion and would hasten on disaster.
For the time being, the best plan is to bring the army forward to keep pressure on the besiegers, and send agents through to Cao Ren so that he knows relief is coming and can encourage his men.
Gongsun Zan was angry. He offered a reward and captured Tian Chou, then asked him, "You did not pass the message to me. Why not?"
In the spring, in the first month on the day xinyou [14 Feb], there was a fire in the Hall of Excellent Virtue in the Southern Palace.On the day wuzi [13 Mar] there was a fire in the C-Office.
Guo Yuan was angry andwas going to kill him. One man laid his body across Jia Kui and asked Guo Yuan topardon him,
but later Ju Shou tried to return to Yuan Shao, so CaoCao killed him.
Cao Cao, who had old acquaintance with Kong Rong, invitedhim to appointment as Court Architect.
Then Zhao Qi came to make peace in the east of the passes. Gongsun Zan accepted a truce with Yuan Shao and each side led their troops away.
Xun Yu, however, took no advantage from that situation. On the contrary, hewas prepared to give his own life that the Han might receive thebenefit. Surely this is exceptional conduct?
In thesummer, in the fourth month, leaving Cao Hong to face Ye, CaoCao went in person to attack Yin Kai, defeated him and returned.
He accompanied the messenger to Cao Cao's army, he was named magistrate of Tiao,and he went with the army to Wuzhong.
For this reason, the rule of the former kings provided that the barbarians were punished if they were rebellious, but treated with kindness if they were submissive. Held in place on the four frontiers, they were not permitted to disturb the [Chinese] nation of ceremony and right conduct. That is all there is to it.
At this time Cao Cao controlled the government and theemperor was no more than a figure-head. Xun Yue had sought toadvise the emperor, but none of his plans were put into effect, so hewrote the book. In general outline, it said:
"Yi Yin and Huo Guang both acted honestly and with complete loyalty, they held position as chief ministers and so controlled the government, and they acted in accordance with the wishes of the people. For these reasons they were able to calculate their following and carry out the enthronement.
Altogether, during the five years that he spent in that post, Wang Ji killed more than ten thousand people.
In the endhe will settle the empire.
From the excellencies, ministers and counsellors down to civil appointments in the commanderies and counties, officials were chosen for their understanding of the classics and for the quality of their bearing. All the guards Rapid as Tigers were learned in the Classic of Filial Piety, and the sons and younger brothers of the Xiongnu barbarians came to the Imperial University for education.So Teaching was established above and Custom perfected below.
"Heaven granted us mountains and rivers, Qin constructed the Great Wall, and Han has set up frontier defences. The purpose of all these was to maintain separation between the inside and the out, and to preserve the distinction of their customs.
The Minister of Justice reported this, and an imperial letter was sent to summon Du Shang to his office.He failed to give a good explanation and eventually accepted the blame, but on account of his previous good service he was granted a special remission.
Am I not in charge of the affairs of state?
In the winter, in the tenth month, the Minister of Ceremonies Chen Dan became Excellency over the Masses.
When he was young he was orphaned and poor, and he and his mother made a living by peddling shoes. He was seven feet and five inches tall, his hands hung below his knees, he could glance around and see his ears.He was a man of great ambitions but few words, and whether he was pleased or angry it did not show in his expression.
There was drought at this time, the harvest was spoilt, and thegentry and the people were cold and hungry. So Yuan Shu's powersteadily declined.
His nephew Li Song had formerly shown a bad character, but the Regular [70] Attendant Tang Heng recommended him to Zong Zi, and Zong Zi appointed Li Song as an officer of the commandery. Fan Pang, however, refused to issue the call to office.
When Yang Xuan sent in his report, however, Zhao Kai the Inspector of Jing province contradicted him, stating falsely that Yang Xuan had not personally defeated the rebels, and that he was making a wrongful claim for the credit.
Ma Teng of [You]fufeng, who had been Major under Geng Bi, also led his troops in rebellion, and he joined forces with Han Sui. With Wang Guo as their leader, they plundered the Three Adjuncts.
On the day gengzi [?gengwu=23 Apr] the Yellow Turban of Nanyang, Zhang Mancheng, attacked and killed the Administrator Chu Gong.
Cao Cao made a sally against Yuan Shao, but gained no success andwas forced back to strengthen his own defences.
Dong Fu and the Prefect of the Grand Granary Zhao Wei both left their offices and followed Liu Yan into Shu.
If you do not follow this program, you willeventually be taken over by someone else, and it will be too late forregrets." Yuan Shao would not accept this advice.
When Chen Deng saw Cao Cao he described Lü Bu's braveryand lack of forethought, how he was erratic in alliances, and howCao Cao should plan to take him early.
He sent some of his men to invite Zhang Ji's army. When thesoldiers heard this, all were glad and turned their hearts to him.
Still, however, there came no help from outside, so Wei Kang andthe Administrator resolved to surrender.
Dependents of the Yuan family collected the corpses of the Dong clan, burnt them and scattered the ashes on the roads.
On the day jiazi [22 Nov] the emperor himself came out to the army and stood below the great umbrellas, while the General-in- chief He Jin took place below the smaller umbrellas.
When officials are appointed at a time of weakness, there is no competent selection, but there are increasingly restrictive regulations and increasingly detailed prohibitions and precautions. When a man does well, he fails to receive his proper reward because of some technicality, and when another does evil, he escapes his due punishment through legal trickery. High and low, everyone is exhausted and confused, and the world is in disorder.
As He Jin considered his plans for several more days, inform- ation leaked out, and the eunuchs became frightened and thought of rebellion.
"Though Yang Feng is brave, he is not very clever. He will notsuspect anything, and will agree to the plan by return of courier. Heis not a problem."
I gave them favourable words andpromises, and the reason I seemed to accept their proposals was tohave them feel at ease and make no preparations. Then we collectedour forces, and the day we attacked them it was like 'when suddenthunder comes there is no time to cover the ears'.
I am chief minister. I have theutmost honour that a subject can hold, far beyond my former hopes.
Liang Xing and his fellows were now frightened, and they ledtheir remaining forces to hold Fu city.
Before this, when the commander of one of Gongsun Zan's outlyingforts was besieged by enemies, Gongsun Zan sent no relief. He said,"If I send aid to one of them, my officers will always expect supportand will be less anxious to fight."
Before this, Liu Dai the Inspector of Yan province had been on good terms with both Yuan Shao and Gongsun Zan. Yuan Shao had sent his wife and sons to stay with Liu Dai, and Gongsun Zan sent his Assistant Officer Fan Fang to bring cavalry to assist him.
Some time later Cao Cao had Shen Pei brought before him, andsaid, "When I was riding earlier you fired several shots at me!"
"The emperor was angry, a cage cart was sent to bring Lu Zhi back to the capital, and he was sentenced to death commuted by one degree.34[185]X The General of the Household of the East, Dong Zhuo of Longxi,was sent to take his place."
Zhang Hao was a younger brother of the Regular Attendant Zhang Feng.
In the fifth month the General Who Manifests Firmness Guo Sibecame General of the Rear and the General Who Gives Tranquillity and Collects the Empire Fan Chou was General of the Right. Both opened offices like the three excellencies, and joined [with the three excellencies and Li Jue] to form six offices. Each made selections and recommendations.
Liu Ye argued, "Liu Bei is a hero among men and has the generosity of a ruler, but he has come a little late. He has held SHU for only a few days, and the people do not yet trust him.
Then Niu Fu became frightened and lost control, and there was panic in his camp. He tried to run away and was killed by his own attendants.
The Chancellor of Pei Chen Gui, son of a younger brother ofChen Qiu, had been a companion of Yuan Shu when he wasyoung.
Now a gang of concubines and eunuchs have combined to dominate the court, and they cheat and deceive your celestial intelligence."Moreover, a horde of petty fellows have been gathered at the Gate of the Vast Capital. They compose rhapsodies and stories, and they are favoured by the common people. They recommend and urge one another forward, and within a few weeks or a month each of them receives promotion.
It will be difficult to collect fifty thousand soldiers immediately, but I have already chosen thirty thousand, and all their ships, supplies and equipment are prepared.
An officer told their mother about it, and she replied, "It is the oldest person in the household who has responsibility. I am the one to take the blame."
As Sun Jian moved forward to Nanyang his army already numbered twenty or thirty thousand men.
He wanted Jia Kui to enter his service, and took a sword tothreaten him, but Jia Kui made no move.
Sun Quan was touched, but he said, "If I leave him to you,
Fearing for his own safety, Cao Yin forged an order from an officer of investigation and sent it to Sun Jian. The order listed Wang Rui's crimes and faults and authorised Sun Jian to arrest him, execute him, then submit a report.
With her two elder brothers, she quietly made plans to prepare a hiding place for Li Xie.They spread it abroad that he had returned to the capital, and everyone believed the story.
Tao Qian told Tian Kai of his imminent danger [from Cao Cao] and Tian Kai came with the Chancellor of Pingyuan, Liu Bei, to bring him help.
WhenYuan Shang heard that Cao Cao had crossed the Yellow River, hebroke off the siege of Pingyuan and turned back to Ye.
"If only your majesty would dismiss these artful but deceitful ministers, and keep them at a distance; and if you would invite men of true distinction. Break up the one-foot tablets, and put a halt to this search for pleasure. Then we may hope that high Heaven will withdraw its warnings and all uncertainty among the people can be dispelled."
Cao Cao asked Liu Ye, "Can we still attack them?" but Liu Ye replied, "They are already settling down again. You cannot attack."
"It would be best to hold your army back and wait for this tohappen, then find a way to catch Zhang Xiu by himself.
He drowned a white horse and made covenant with his troops that they should join hearts and hold firm.
"Have I ventured to neglect this code of conduct, and have I failed to sacrifice myself as appeasement for your wrath?
Liu Bei had turned back when he heard the news, but by the time he reached Xiapi his army had disintegrated.
Dong Zhuo asked Cai Yong what he thought of the proposal."Your Excellency's majestic virtue, how truly imposing!" said Cai Yong.
Fa Zheng of [You]fufeng was Colonel Consultant of the Army toLiu Zhang, but Liu Zhang paid no attention to anything hesuggested, and he was despised by the people of his district who hadcome to take refuge with him in Shu. Fa Zheng was discouragedthat he could not realise his ambitions.
containing Part 5 of the reign of Emperor Xian Jian'an 4: 199 AD
The Colonel Ding Fei loosed cattle and horses to distractthe pursuers, the enemy milled about as they rounded the beasts up,and so Cao Cao got across.
He was intending to appoint the General Who Subdues the Caitiffs Sun Jiao to act jointly with Lü Meng as Grand Controllers of the Left and Right Divisions. Lü Meng said,however, "If you believe the General Who Subdues the Caitiffs is the right man, then give him the job. If you think I am suitable, use me.
When Lu Su arrived at Xiakou he heard that Cao Cao was already moving into Jing province. Travelling day and night, he came to Nan commandery, but by that time Liu Zong had surrenered and Liu Bei had fled south. Lu Su went straight to meet him, and caught up with him at the Chang Slope in Dangyang.
Xu Qiu, former Administrator of Guangling, obtained the GreatSeal of State and sent it to the emperor.
He sent swordsmen to arrest Chen Fan. Chen Fan waved his sword and shouted at Wang Fu, and his words and expression were fierce and desperate.
On the day bingshen [28 Feb], last of the month, there was an eclipse of the sun.
How can you treat him so lightly? asked Sun Quan.
Liu Bei refused to let the army pass, saying to Sun Yu, "If you insist on taking SHU, then I shall go with dishevelled hair to the mountains. I cannot lose faith before the empire."
The Assistant Officer was extremely angry. He had the junior officers of the commandery arrested and jailed, and he sent in a report about Shi Bi.
As the emperor was moving to the east, Yang Feng had triedunsuccessfully to intercept him from Liang.
Wang Yun was a hard, stern man, who hated evil. Because he was afraid of Dong Zhuo, he had humbled himself and obeyed him,
None dared look up, and each in turn smearedthe blood on their mouths [to accept the oath].
To lead an army into the open country of Shu commandery and Hanzhong, with lines of communi cation over ten thousand li, then conquer the whole province all without a reverse, this is something Sun Wu and Wu Qi would have found difficult.
We ask that orders be sent to the Director of Retainers, the [Ministers with rank/salary at] Fully Two Thousand shi, the Colonels of the City Gates and of the Five Regiments, and the Adjutant of the Northern Army, that each make carefulinvestigation within his particular area of responsibility, to find out who should be dismissed from his appointment.The reports should be sent to the offices of the excellencies, and subsidiary comments should be prepared for any cases that have not been fully considered."
but then he fought and his troops were defeated.Some of Lu Bu's cavalry captured Cao Cao but did not realise it. They asked him, "Where is Cao Cao?"
When a servant refuses to obey his master, he turns from the Way of right action. With a newly-created Chu to resist China proper, that is sure to be dangerous. And alliance with Liu Bei against Lord Cao, that is no match.
and your majesty recognised him and appointed him, so that he held position among the Three Excellencies. "But then he suffered false accusation from the Director of Retainers Yang Qiu, and was brought to death while his family was banished far away. All the empire was miserable and disappointed, and worthy ministers felt cheated of their hopes.
On the day yihai [miswritten for dinghai = 27 Dec?] the emperor came to Anyi riding in an oxcart. Wang Yi the Administrator of Hedong offered tribute of cotton and silk; it was all distributed among the ministers and officials, and Wang Yi was enfeoffed as a marquis. Hu Cai was made General Who Subdues the East and Zhang Yang became General Who Gives Tranquillity to the State. Both held the Staff of Authority with the right to maintain offices.
"Now Chen Gong has rebelled and brought in Lu Bu. All the other cities have joined him, and it may indeed seem possible that they can take everything. If you think about it, however, what sort of a man is Lu Bu?
You hold four provinces with a population of a million families. Irespectfully hand over this great trust, that you may bring it to fulfil ment." Yuan Tan came from Qing province to receive Yuan Shu andplanned to escort him north by way of Xiapi.
Any person who seeks to impede the grand design will be dealt with by military law."
They thought there must be tens of thousands; they had no idea it was only Liu Jing.
Duke Cao of WEI sent Zhang He to take charge of operations in the region of the Three Ba, and he intended to shift their people into Hanzhong.Zhang He brought his army forward to Dangqu,
Leaving some officers to guard the baggage, therefore, Xiahou Yuan led light-armed troops to Changli. They attacked the camp of the Shao [dang] Qiang, and Han Sui did send help.
Liu Bei sent the Administrator of Yidu, Meng Da of Fufeng, to go north from Zigui to attack Fangling. The Administrator of Fangling, Kuai Qi, was killed.
"Those who hold high positions should prepare for war, so thatthey may always be ready for the unexpected. In time of peace theygive responsibility for military training to the civil administration,so that when there is an emergency the armies are ready. This iswhat is meant by 'maintaining authority'.
Xun Yu assisted Wu of Wei to bring a restoration. He promotedworthy men and gave work to the able, he trained soldiers and hedrilled troops, he seized opportunities and he made plans, he foughtand was successful in every direction,
Liu Bei stayed at Ye for amonth, and the men he had lost gradually returned to him.
In the great disorders at the end of Han, people lived in utmostmisery, and only a man of unusual ability could bring them help.
The enemy have a tight siege-ring about them, and inside their camp they must be quite desperate. They have asked to surrender and have been refused, they want to break out but find it impossible. So they know they must fight to the death.
Zhou Yu followed this plan. They completely defeated Cao Ren's men at Yiling and returned with three hundred horses.
There was a pause, the enemy approached in greater numbers, and somesplit off to go for the baggage.
"I have long been south of the Yangzi," replied Hua Xin, "and have always wanted to return to the north. If Sun of Kuaiji comes, I shall leave."That night he drafted a proclamation, and next morning he sentsome of his officers to take it with them and to welcome Sun Ce.
Yang Ding and Dong Cheng brought their troops to escort the emperor to the camp of Yang Feng. Xia Yu and the others urged their men on to halt the imperial carriage by force. Yang Ding and Yang Feng fought bravely and defeated them, so the emperor was able to get away.
Liu Bei owes a great deal to our state, rights and wrongs are not yet decided, and how could Guan Yu reject our good will?"
When Liu He came to Nanyang,however, Yuan Shu kept him there as a guest to force Liu Yu into alliance. He would not allow him to continue his journey, but promised that when reinforcements came they would advance to the west together, and he made Liu He write a letter to Liu Yu.
Why do you question it?" Deng Xi claimed to be ill, andwent away.
Zhang Huan executed only the ringleaders, and the remainder were all pacified and accepted.
Chen Gong of Dong commandery, a subordinate commander under Cao Cao, said to him, "The province has no master, and the imperial authority is broken. Let me talk to the senior officers of the province,then Your Excellency can go at once to govern it. From this base you may receive the empire. This is the method of the hegemon kings."
The Yuan clan had been honoured for genera- tions, while Yuan Shao and his younger cousin Yuan Shu, who was General of the Household Rapid as a Tiger, were respected by the great families, He Jin trusted them and gave them appointment.
King Anguo of Yutian [Khotan] attacked Jumi, thoroughly defeated that state and killed its king.
Taishi Ziyi is brave, he has fierce courage, and he is nota turn-coat.
In governing them, if one follows the right way, then they will be submissive and obedient; if one follows the wrong way they become rebellious and disturbed. This is quite appropriate and natural.
Dong Zhuo set fire to the heads and burnt them, and he gave the females to his soldiers as servants and concubines.
Only the Palace Attendant Huan Jie asked, "Does your majesty believe Cao Ren and the others can cope with the situation?"
Within a few weeks, like clouds from every direction, more than twenty thousand men and a thousand cavalry had come to join him. His authority shook the lands east of the Yangzi.
Realising that Zhang Lu meant well, he sent messengers to put his mind at ease.
In this year the emperor built the Hall of Ten Thousand Gold Pieces in the Western Garden. He brought gold and cash and silk from the Ministry of Finance to store it there, and he deposited several tens of millions of cash with the Attendants at the Yellow Gates and Regular Attendants. In Hejian he bought land and houses and built a pleasure palace for himself.
Gao Gan sought aid from the Xiongnu, but the Shanyu would not receive him.
The eunuchs also made accusations against the General of the Household Rapid as a Tiger Liu Shu of Hejian, and the former Master of Writing Wei Lang of Kuaiji, saying they had shared in the plots of Dou Wu and his associates. Both committed suicide.
I urge you to decide this great plan before it is too late. Do not take those fellows' advice."
Sadly, however, the ruinous disorder inherited by Emperors Huan and Ling was compounded by their own stupid tyranny. They protected and nourished the evil-doers and the vicious as if they were closer than their own flesh and blood. They killed and destroyed those who were loyal and true more diligently than if they had been rebels and enemies.
When I have asked the reason for these delays I have been told that it is because of the Law of the Three Relationships.
Lü Bu was delighted, and immediately sent ChenDeng with a memorial of thanks for the favour, together with areply to the letter.
I am no more than an errand-boy, acting upon orders. If you refuse the appointment, I shall simply go back. Nonetheless, I shall be sorry for it, and I fear you may regret it too.
About this time, however, Yang Ci was dismissed, so the matter was simply pigeon-holed.
Liu Yao sent his Administrator of Yuzhang, Zhu Hao, to attack Zhuge Xuan, the Administrator appointed to that territory by Yuan Shu, and Zhuge Xuan retreated to defend Xicheng.
Cao Cao sent the General Who Gives Tranquillity to the WestCao Ren to take overall command of operations against the rebels.An edict ordered the soldiers to strengthen their fortifications butnot to join battle.
if one is planning to deal with a fierce enemy, thereis no weapon so effective as honest and peaceful administration;and diligent study of the arts of war taught by Sun and Wu can never match a regular maintenance of the law.
Sun Quan appointed Lu Su as Colonel Who Displays Firmness,taking command of Zhou Yu's troops, and he named Cheng PuAdministrator of Nan commandery.
Zheng Tai resigned his position and went away, observing to Xun You, "It is not easy to assist Lord He!"
This way, we can settle thebusiness at leisure."
If inside they are prepared to fight to the death, and outside there is strong help, then your majesty should restrain the imperial army as a means to display the power you hold in reserve. Why go yourself, and thus show you are concerned about the possibility of defeat?
The mother of Xu Shu was captured by Cao Cao, and Xu Shu made his excuses to Liu Bei. Pointing to his breast, he said, "In the beginning, the reason I sought to plan with you for the hegemony was because of this square inch of territory [the heart].
Men of great family exploited the market, and the price of a single horse rose to two million cash.
When Mao Rong [of Chenliu] was over forty years old he was working in the fields, but then took shelter from the rain with his fellows under a tree. All his fellows huddled down in a group, but Mao Rong kept aloof in a proper attitude of dignity.
In the spring, in the third month on the day xinwei [30 May], there was an amnesty for the empire.
An edict appointed the Lady Bian, wife of King Cao, as Queen of WEI.
At this time Du Shang had been recalled to the capital, and an imperial edict appointed him a General of the Household, with command of more than twenty thousand men, horse and foot [from You and Ji provinces, from the Liyang encampment and from the Wuhuan auxiliaries] to go to the relief of Chen Qiu. Raising troops from all the commanderies of Jing province, he combined them for the attack and completely defeated the rebels.31 They took the heads of Hu Lan and over three thousand of his followers. Du Shang returned to his former position as Inspector of Jing province.
He appointed officials for the three commanderies of Changsha, Lingling and Guiyang,
The Chosen Lady Tian Sheng was favoured by the emperor, and he intended to establish her as his Empress.
The emperor accepted part of this advice.He dismissed five hundred women from his palace, he enfeoffed Huang Jun only as a secondary marquis, and he made Deng Wanshi the Marquis of Nan District.
When the fighting was over the men of the army all said GuoYuan was dead, but they could not find his head.
Before I see suchdisaster come I would first jump into this well." Very startled, SunCe promptly set Wei Teng free.
I look upon him as a son, and you should respecthim as an elder brother."
Liu Bei would sleep with these two men in the same bed and he treated them with the affection of brothers, but if there were others about they would stand in attendance all day. They followed Liu Bei everywhere, and would undertake anything for him, no matter how difficult or dangerous.
The valuables of Guan Yu's household were sealed up to await Sun Quan's arrival.
Cao Cao was unsuccessful in his attack on Tan, but he stormed and massacred Qulü, Suiling and Xiaqiu. The cities were laid waste, no-one was left alive, and even the chickens and dogs were gone.
When Fan Pang came to the prison, the warder said, "All the prisoners here give a sacrifice to Gaoyao."
So Liu He gave his consent and agreed a plan with Yang Qiu.
In the spring, in the first month, there was appointed for the first time an Assistant of the Stables for Thoroughbreds, responsible for collecting horses from among the commanderies and kingdoms.
Zhu Mu remained on his knees and was reluctant to get up, but those in attendance ordered him, "Go!"
Henan was desolate and had nothing of value so Zhu Jun went east to camp at Zhongmou. He wrote to the provinces and commanderies seeking troops to attack Dong Zhuo.
Lu Bu's officers Xue Lan and Li Feng were camped at Juye, and Cao Cao attacked them. Lu Bu went to aid Xue Lan, but he failed to break through and was compelled to retreat. Cao Cao cut off the heads of Xue Lan and his followers.
Sun Ce treated Zhang Chao as a teacher and a friend, and always took his advice in both civil and military affairs.
The Grand Commandant Zhou Zhong was dismissed, and the Minister Coachman Zhu Jun became Grand Commandant with control of the Secretariat.
Yuan Shao sent men to ask help from Liu Biao, but though Liu Biaomade promises he never actually sent anything. Neither would he help Cao Cao.
"That is not right," replied Xu You, "tell it truthfully!" Cao Caosaid, "We can last out half a year."
And if only an understanding ruler had appeared at that time to support them, then the fortune of Han might yet be maintained without limit or measure.
At this time Cao Cao made new rulings on the collection ofrevenue, and orders were sent out to the provinces and command eries. He increased the punishments for failure, and collection of thesilk tax was strictly enforced.
Liu Bei travelled north from Jiangzhou along the Dianjiang River toFu.
"Though it is wrong to disobey orders," replied Huangfu Song, "I shall also be at fault if I execute him on my own authority.
Han Fu was frightened and said, "What can I do?"
Because of this, the Regular Attendant Hou Lan29 arranged that the widow of Zhang Fan should send in a letter with a formal complaint, and the eunuchs then slandered Cheng Jin and Liu Zhi.
"Though provincial and commandery offices may investigate these matters within their own territory, such rampant corruption and bribery is a source of temptation to honest officials.
Besides this, the number of women chosen for your harem has reached the thousands;they eat meat and they wear fine silk, while their cosmetics, powder and eye-shadow are more costly than anyone can measure.
In the winter, in the tenth month the Excellency of Works Zhou Jing left office. The Minister of Ceremonies Liu Mao was appointed Excellency of Works. Liu Mao was a son of Liu Kai.
Just make the plans we need to defeat Huang Zu.Why need you object to anything that Chief Clerk Zhang may say?"
Then Liu Zhu's reinforcements arrived from the east and Zhao Yan was at last able to enforce his orders again. So he shifted the remaining thousand as well, they caught up with the rest and all travelled together.
Unless we put some short-term strain upon the people now, we can never hope for a long-lasting peace.
"It is easy to stir up the empire," replied Yang Biao, "but very difficult to calm it down. Please think again."
Hua Xin considered, "To take advantageof such opportunity and seize command is not the conduct of a loyalservant." The people held him for several months but in the end theylet him go and still had no-one to lead them.
Cao Cao said to his officers, "Sun Quan does not takeadvantage of me."
Dianyu got down from his horse and offered it to He Xun, but He Xun refused to mount and so he was captured by the Qiang.
In the winter, in the tenth month Zheng Li was arrested and sent to the Prison of the Northern Office [of the Yellow Gates], and it was arranged that the Director of the Imperial Secretariat Lian Zhong should make false complaint to the throne that "Zheng Li and his fellows have planned to receive Liu Kui and establish him as emperor. This is greatly refractory and impious."As a result of this, an imperial edict ordered the Inspector of Ji province to arrest Liu Kui and examine him for the truth of the matter. Liu Kui was reprimanded and put under great pressure, and was ordered to commit suicide. His eleven concubines, seventy sons and daughters, and twenty-four serving-maids died in prison. The Tutor and the Chancellor and lower officials [of the kingdom of Bohai], all suffered execution.
Yet your majesty interrupts me and orders me not to speak. Is this the right way to behave towards one of your servants?"
I'm in a hurry. I cannot spare the time for all this?"
"It is for this reason that I did not dare to stand alone against your heavenly authority, but instead took refuge among the mountains and forests. I thought to wait for the time that your majesty would bring your spiritual and sage-like attention to my case, would apply your special and unique intelligence, saving the lives of the miserable and the innocent.
Cao Pi followed this, and carefully cultivated a good character.
Sun Quan was extremely angry, and he sent Lil Meng with twenty thousand soldiers to seize the three commanderies.
The former Grand Commandant Cao Song had taken refuge in Langye. His son Cao Cao ordered Ying Shao, Administrator of Taishan, to invite him.
Yuan Shao sent someone to suggest to Cao Cao that he send his family to stay at Ye.
Cao Cao said to Xun Yu, "The leaders west of the passes havemade formal submission, but amongst themselves they are planningtreachery. Zhang Cheng plunders and causes trouble between Xiaoand Mian, and he has contact with Liu Biao in the south. If Wei Gu[341] and the others follow his example, they could be a realdanger.
"I cannot run away and abandon my ministers!" replied the emperor. "That would be a poor return for their service."
Xu Zhi wrote to warn Guo Tai, "When a great tree is about to fall, a single rope is not enough to save it. Why do you concern yourself with these matters, and do not seek a quieter place?" Guo Tai was surprised and touched, and said, "I note your advice with respect, and regard you as my guide."
But now your lordship is beginning to build a government, and you cannot go house to house through the empire to explain yourself You must show this man some respect or many of the people will be surprised and disap pointed."
Sun Quan rode together with Yu Jin. Yu Fan shouted at Yu Jin, "You are a surrendered prisoner. How dare you keep the head of your horse level with our lord's?"
Giving orders to the army, "Those who are loyal, stay quiet and still,"
"How can you command a hundred thousand men at arms andsit to watch the result of their contest? They ask for help and yourefuse to assist them. You know which man is right, but you do notwant to turn to him.
Even though I was successful, I was aided by Heaven.
So Duan Jiong took personal command, and advanced his positions to some forty or fifty li from Fanting Mountain, where the Qiang were encamped.He sent the Major of Cavalry Tian Yan and the Brevet Major Xia Yu,leading five thousand men, to go forward, attack and defeat them.
In the twelfth month the Minister of the Imperial Household Yang Ci became Excellency over the Masses.
Wang Lie's ability and insight surpassed that of others and when he was young he was better known than either Guan Ning or Bing Yuan.
Cao Cao arrested Zhi Xi and was going to kill him, but then pardoned him.
Li Jue and the others offered a high reward for Lü Bu's death or capture, and Lü Bu fled once more to Yuan Shao.
"Now if there is a worthy man of honourable ambition and strong character, then I will make him known; and if there is someone of immoral and dissolute behaviour, then I shall report on him. By this means I hope to arrange that your excellency's rewards and punishment are appropriately given; and that will be of no insignificant help to your reputation!" Wang Yu felt embarrassed, and thereafter showed Du Mi the utmost respect.
The Lianyu Qiang and all the people of the Xianlian Qiang made a rebellion.They plundered the Three Adjuncts.
Zhang Liao called on him to come down and fight, but Sun Quan dared not move. Then he looked again and, seeing how few troops Zhang Liao had with him, he surrounded him with several rings of men.
Generations of his family have displayed grace and virtue, and all the empire has received their favour; once more, how do you compare with Yuan?
"I learnt from my teacher that 'When the cypress is withered and the bamboo is dry, in no more than two years the Son of Heaven will suffer the same fate.'
The Colonel of the City Gates Dou Wu took part in discussions on the succession. He summoned the Imperial Clerk Liu Shu of Hejian, and asked him which members of the imperial clan in the empire were of good moral quality.Liu Shu recommended Liu Hong, the Marquis of Jiedu Village.
In the eleventh month Fan You, the Administrator of Yiduappointed by Liu Bei, King of Hanzhong, fled the commandery.The local officials and the leaders of barbarians all surrendered to Lu Xun.
Liu Ba closed his gates and excused himself on grounds of ill health.
Han Zhong withdrew to the citadel, but he was frightened and asked to surrender.
"Your force is only a tenth of his, yet you have marked theground and hold it. You have him by the throat so that he cannot getforward, and you have now maintained that position for half a year.
On the day xinhai [28 Sep] Cao Cao was given charge as Directorof Retainers with control of the Secretariat.
More than three hundred of [Liang Ji's] former subordinates and clients were dismissed.The court was empty.
Liu Dai discussed the problem with his subordinates, but days passed and they could not decide. They had heard that Cheng Yu of Dong commandery was wise in planning, so they called him in and asked his advice."If you give up the alliance with Yuan Shao who is close at hand," said Cheng Yu, "and look for distant aid from Gongsun Zan, that is like seeking help from a man of Yue when your son is drowning.
And [in the eleventh month] on the day wuchen [2 Dec]35 he visited Yunmeng and viewed the Han river there. On his return journey he visited Xinye.
You facegreat strength with great weakness, and if you cannot control himyou will be taken. Here is a crisis for the empire.
In the twelfth month [miswritten for the eleventh],38 as the emperor reached Hongnong. Zhang Ji, Li Jue and Guo Si came in pursuit. There was a great battle at Dongjian in Hongnong, and Dong Cheng and Yang Feng were defeated. The officials, lower officers and commoners who died were too many to count. They abandoned the imperial insignia and tallies, the tablets for appointment, the records and books. Almost nothing remained.
In the autumn, in the seventh month King Cao of WEI came in person to take command against Liu Bei.In the ninth month he arrived at Chang'an.
"If Yuan Shang comes by the mainroad," observed Cao Cao, "we should indeed keep away. But if hecomes through the western hills, then we have him."
When the law has been settled and the punishment fixed, then you may send down an edict of compassion. It is appropriate that you make a few special concessions, but that can happen only after your officials have carried out their strict responsibilities.
In the ninth month on the day dingwei [6 Nov] there was an earthquake in the capital district.
Liu Yu and Gongsun Zan had long been on bad terms. Gongsun Zan had often attacked Yuan Shao, and though Liu Yu forbade him he could not enforce his orders. He therefore reduced the supplies sent to Gongsun Zan.
When Yuan Shao saw Zang Hong's letter he realised that there was no chance of his surrender. He reinforced his men and pressed the attack hard.
Cao Cao led an attack on Gao Gan. He left his eldest son Cao Pi to guard Ye, with the Attendant Officer Cui Yan to guide him.
Then Cao Cao attacked Sui Gu and Yufuluo of the Xiongnu at Neihuang, and completely defeated them.
The administration of an enlightened ruler makes careful selection of loyal worthy men and then employs them. Whether they serve in the court or outside, if they do well they are rewarded and if they have faults they are punished. There is no opportunity for private interest, laws are maintained without difficulty, and the world receives excellent government.
Guanghe 光和 3: 180 AD
Cao Caoordered Wang Xiu to take Guan Tong's head, but Wang Xiubelieved Guan Tong was the loyal servant of a fallen state, and heloosed his bonds and sent him to Cao Cao. Cao Cao was pleasedand pardoned him, and he appointed Wang Xiu as a Senior Clerk in[his] offices as Excellency of Works.
Frightened of the punishment he might meet, Han Xian fled aloneon horseback to Yang Feng.
Hu Zhen and Lü Bu quarrelled. Sun Jian came out to attack, completely defeated them, and took the head of their Chief Controller Hua Xiong.
The officerssaid again, "Now we can mount."
Part 2 of the reign of Emperor HuanYanxi 延熹 7: 164 AD
Cao Cao besieged Huguan, and in the third month the city surrendered.
When he was just over two li from the northern army, he set all the ships on fire.The fire was fierce and the wind was strong and the ships went like arrows. The whole of the northern fleet was burnt, and the fire reached the camps on the bank.
while Dong Zhao wrote on Cao Cao's behalf to Li Jue, Guo Si and the others, with varying compliments to suit each man.
Jian'an 17: 212 AD
There he learned Liu Bei had already gonepast, so he led five thousand of his best cavalrymen in close pursuit. In a single day and night they covered more than three hundred li to the Chang Slope in Dangyang.
When they reached Dayang the emperor went to Li Le's camp.
In the autumn, in the seventh month on the day jiazi [12 Aug] the emperor came to Luoyang, where he took up lodgings in the mansion of the former Regular Attendant Zhao Zhong.
Du Shang had been engaged on these campaigns for three years, and all the disturbances were now ended. He was enfeoffed as Marquis of You District.
Fan Pang's mother replied, "Your name now ranks with those of Li and Du. Even if you die for it, how can one have regret?Those who achieve a glorious name, cannot also expect a long life."
Cao Cao sent the General Who Terrifies CriminalsZhang Liao to attack and behead them. Then Zhang Liao was sentto join Yue Jin and Li Dian with seven thousand men in garrison atHefei.
In the eighth month Cao Cao came to the Tong Pass and drew uphis lines against Ma Chao and the others.
The leaders within the passes stayed neutral as Cao Cao and YuanShao fought, watching to see what would happen.
？
Your Honour should plan to deal with them early, before Cao Cao can get at them.
Sun Jian rode fast during the night to see Yuan Shu, drew on the ground to show his plans, and said, "The reasons I have taken service with you are that above I am attacking a rebel for the emperor, while below I give some help to your family in a private feud.
Some time later, Cao Zhi the Marquis of Linzi rode a carriage fast down the centre of the imperial highway, and he had a Major's Gate opened to let him through.
In the twelfth month the Xianbi raided the two provinces You and Bing.
Part 1B of the reign of Emperor Huan,Yongshou 永壽 3: 157 AD
Guo Tu and Shen Pei argued, "With your spiritual warfare, ifyou lead the mighty armies of the north against the Yellow River toattack Cao Cao, it will be easy as turning your hand. Why shouldyou act as he says?"
Yang Qiu sent retainers to assassinate Cai Yong as he was on the road to exile, but the men were so impressed by his honourable qualities that none would carry out the deed.
Lu Kang the Administrator of Le'an sent in a memorial of protest, "In ancient times, when Duke Xuan of Lu set a tax on the arable land, a plague of locusts made their appearance.
In the autumn, in the seventh month the WEI first set up altars to theGods of the Soils and Grain and a princely ancestral temple.
When Liu Bei was young he had become good friends with Guan Yu of Hedong and Zhang Fei of Zhuo commandery. He made Guan Yu and Zhang Fei Majors with Separate Commands and shared his troops with them.
In the autumn, in the eighth month Cao Cao attacked Zhao Duand his associates and killed them.
In the ninth month the Minister of the Household Zhou Jing became Grand Commandant.
Cao Cao's laws and orders are strict, his men arefresh and drilled. This is not Gongsun Zan, who sat and waited forour attack.
Yuan Shang fled by night and took refuge in the Qi Hills.
Shentu Pan was the only person who expressed concern about this, saying, "Long ago, in the period of the Warring States, there were scholars in retirement offering opinions all over the place,and it even happened that the rulers of the various kingdoms would sweep the ground before them in welcome.Yet in the end there came the time of misfortune when scholars were buried and books were burned.This is what we are looking at now."
That night the convoy came to Baling. The attendants were hungry, and Zhang Ji allocated rations to each person.
combined their forces to attack Yingtao, but Ox-horn was struck by an arrow and mortally wounded. Before he died, he ordered [193] his followers to obey Flying Swallow as their leader, and Flying Swallow changed his surname to Zhang.
Bing Yuan had strict principles, and he would express himselfclearly to set things right; everyone from Gongsun Du down was wary of him.
If we do this, the Qiang will be completely broken, the Xiongnu will remain in submission, and the commandery and county administrations that have been shifted to the interior will be able to return to their original territory.I would estimate that when the Qiang rebelled during the Yongchu period [107-113], 24,000 million cash were spent in fourteen years. At the end of Yonghe [136-141] there were another seven years of costs totalling more than 8,000 million cash.
In former times, a concubine from the imperial palace was sent away in marriage to the Xiongnu, and a princess was given to pacify the Wusun.Even if I had been foolish enough to do what I am accused of doing, it was only a matter of paying a few thousands or tens of thousands of cash, and by that means we would have kept the rebel Qiang quiet.Such a program represents a possible plan of action for a competent minister, and I personally hold the respect of men with military experience.What fault is there to be found, either in neglect of honour or in disregard of policy?
The Director of the Secretariat Yang Qiu would slap his thigh to express his anger, and said, "If I became Director of Retainers, how could I tolerate this crowd?"
anenemy on the defensive, he presents no cause for concern."
The provincial headquarters had previously been at Shouchun, but Yuan Shu had occupied that city, so Liu Yao arranged to go south across the Yangzi, where Wu Jing and Sun Ben received him and set him up at Qu'a.
Lü Bu sent Li Su to Shan with imperial orders to kill Niu Fu, but Niu Fu and his officers rebelled and attacked him. Li Su was defeated and fled to Hongnong and Lü Bu had him arrested and killed.
The former Grand Commandant Yang Biao was related to YuanShu by marriage, and Cao Cao disapproved. Presenting a falseaccusation that Yang Biao was planning to supplant the emperor,
Cao Zhi was intelligent and quick-witted, with remarkable skill and ability, of fine literary talent, learned and clever. Cao Cao was extremely fond of him.
Ji province has a strong army, objected Yuan Shao, "and my troops are hungry and weary. If we are unsuccessful we shall be left with nothing."
"I deeply regret that I never had the opportunity to explain[myself to Liu Yao] while he was alive.
and if your plan to take Xu province failed, where could you turn?
Cao Jie then went direct to the forbidden apartments and spoke to the emperor: "Yang Qiu was formerly a harsh and cruel official, and the offices of the Three Excellencies called for his dismissal. It was only because of some petty achievements in Jiujiang that he was again given [157] appointment [at the capital].
The Yellow Turbans had been plundering and making trouble in Xu province, and thecourt appointed him as Inspector.
When Huangfu Gui arrived, he sent in reports with detailed accounts of their crimes;some were punished and others dismissed.
Even when some of his men planned to revolt,each time it was discovered he wept for the plotters, pardoned themquickly and asked no more about it. So he came to misfortune.
The Imperial Clerk Zheng Tai protested, "Dong Zhuo is extremely brutal and has small sense of honour, while his ambitions have no limit. If you involve him in the imperial government and entrust him with great affairs you will lose control over his evil intentions and will surely endanger the court.
The Inspector and Administrator paid no attention, and theyopened the gates to Ma Chao.
So heavier punishments will not stop desertions; they will make the problem worse!"
Before this, Wang Yun had appointed Song Yi and Wang Hong, men of his native commandery, as Eastern Supporter and Western Sustainer. Li Jue and the others wanted to kill Wang Yun but they were afraid the two would make trouble, so they sent for them.
There was then some discussion about disbanding all the armies, but someone argued to Wang Yun, "Up until now the men from Liang province have dreaded the Yuan and feared the east of the passes. If you suddenly dismiss the troops and open the passes, all the peoplewill certainly feel threatened.
As Lord Cao is at grips with the Yuan, Gao Gan and Guo[314] Yuan have attacked Hedong together.
and he secretly encouraged Yuan Shu to keep hold of Liu He and take [Liu Yu's] men into his own command. So Liu Yu and Gongsun Zan had a [further] grudge against each other.
By nature, however, Dong Zhuo was obstinate and over-bearing. On one occasion Lü Bu had some slight disagreement with him, and Dong Zhuo seized a hand-axe and threw it at him. Lü Bu ducked quickly and it missed. He changed his tune and apologised, so Dong Zhuo's anger left him,
Dong Zhuo, however, paid no attention, but camped in Hedong to await developments.
If on the other hand, a ruler foils to appreciate this, praising only men of physical achievement and reserving great fiefs and rich rewards for his men of war, then his people will see the advantages of disorder, they will begin to compete in fighting and killing, and they will rely upon military might and trust to strength: shields and weapons will never be put away.
Jia Biao applied the law with the utmost rigour, applying the same penalty [against those who abandoned their children] as to murderers.
Liu He escaped from Yuan Shu, and got away to the north, but he was then detained by Yuan Shao.
The best thing to do is move west together, attack Chang'an and avenge Lord Dong.
He appointed Dian Wei as Commandant and had him act as permanent guard on his great tent with several hundred of his own men.
Guanghe 光和 1: 178 AD
Yuan Shao appointed Zhu Han of Henei as Assistant Officer for Officials at the Capital.
When the emperor received this memorial, he absolutely shook with anger.He ordered the high officials to have Li Yun arrested, and issued an edict that Warriors with Swords and Lances of the Imperial Secretariat should escort him to the Prison of the Northern Office of the Yellow Gates.The Regular Attendant Guan Ba, together with Imperial Clerks and [officers of] the Minister of Justice, were all sent at various times to examine Li Yun [by torture].
The Excellency of Works Tang Zhen left office. The Steward of the Palace of Perpetual Joy Xu Xun became Excellency of Works.
Realising what he wanted, Sun Quan took Lu Su by the hand and said, "What do you want to say?"
Furious, Lü Bu brandished a sword before Yuan Huan, "If youobey my commands you live, if you refuse you die." Unperturbed, Yuan Huan laughed and replied, "I have heard itsaid that only a man of virtue can give disgrace to another, I haveheard nothing about common abuse.
"Assistant to the Chancellor," replied Zhu Jun, "is not a position I am competent to fill. Shifting the capital is ill-considered, and that is important.
"Had King Cheng killed the Duke of Shao," responded KongRong, "could the Duke of Zhou claim not to have known?"
An imperial edict promoted Tao Qian to be Governor of Xu province, with the additional title of General Who Gives Tranquillity to the East, and enfeoffed him as Marquis of [Liyang.He appointed.
Sun Quan named Zhou Yu as Administrator of Nan command ery and had him occupy Jiangling. Cheng Pu was Administrator ofJiangxia, with headquarters at [407] Shaxian. Lü Fan became Ad ministrator of Pengze, and Lü Meng was magistrate of Xunyang.
Her harem attendants congratulated the Lady Bian, "Now that the General of the Household has been appointed Heir, everyone in the empire will be pleased. You should pour out treasure in gifts."
Now, when Sun Quan was at Ruxu, Jiang Qin and Lü Meng were responsible for all his forces, and Jiang Qin always praised Xu Sheng. Sun Quan asked about it.
Ma Chao and the others several times challenged him tobattle, but he would not accept.
？
Buildings and mansions constantly increase, filled with clever toys and unusual trinkets. oppressed by fierce [60] punishments the people are forced to dig into the mountains, quarrying out stone for the work.
Dong Zhuo was considering a great levy of troops to attack east of the mountains,
As the troops of Liu Biao and Zhang Xiu camewith full force in pursuit, he loosed his soldiers from ambush,striking both flanks with horse and foot, and completely defeatedthem.
The rebel army wasstrong and fierce and Cao Cao's soldiers were few and weak, but he cared for his men and encouraged them, made open rewards and clear punishments, and looked or enemy weaknesses to spring his own surprises. They fought day and night, and each time he took some prisoners. The rebels retreated and fled.
Because of rumours, an edict commanded the excellencies and ministers to impeach those heads of provinces, commanderies and kingdoms who were corrupt and were exploiting the people.
and a few weeks later came the news of the rebellion of the three Shanyu.
I would never bend the truth to save Mao Jie, for that would betray the ruling principles."On the other hand, Mao Jie has received honour and fevour for many years, he has always been upright and loyal, and everyone has held him in respect. It is surprising he should act like this now.
An imperial edict ordered the office of the Master of Techniques in the palace to prepare thirty-two portraits of Yue Song, Jiang Lan and other scholars of the [School at the Gate of the] Vast Capital, to serve as inspiration for the students.
If we send a light force by night to make asurprise attack, Xu can be taken.
At this time all the palaces and houses had been burnt, and the officials had to clear away thorns to live among the walls.
The Grand Commandant Hu Guang, the Excellency over the Masses Han Yan and the Excellency of Works Sun Lang were all found guilty of subservience to the Liang clan and of failing to protect the throne.They were detained at the Watch-House of Long Life,then sentenced to the death penalty remitted by one degree, and were dismissed to become commoners.
"In former times, Liu An the King of Huainan protested at the attack on Yue, saying, 'If the men of Yue are prepared to face death in order to resist authority, while ordinary conscript troops will retreat after suffering a single casualty, then even if you took the head of the King of Yue, it would still be a source of embarrassment to Great Han.'
Cao Cao brought his army forward to the Yuan River.3 Su You wasgoing to change sides, but the plan was discovered and he fled toCao Cao.
In the intercalary [third] month on the day jiawu [jiazi?: 11 May] [Liu Shu] the grandfather of the emperor was posthumously honoured as Xiaoyuan Emperor, and his wife of the Xia family became the Xiaoyuan Empress. The emperor's late father [Liu Chang] was named Xiaoren Emperor, and the emperor's mother of the Dong family became Honoured Lady of the Funerary Park of Circumspection.
"I suggest the best plan is to transfer Liu Bei to some office inWu, build him quantities of palaces and houses, and give him plentyof women and multiple pleasures to rejoice his ears and eyes. Keepthe other two away from him,
In the winter, in the tenth month on the day renshen [3 Nov] the emperor paid a visit to Chang'an.
Before this, when Dong Zhuo entered the passes [to Chang'an] he had persuaded Han Sui and Ma Teng to join him in dealing with the east of the mountains, and Han Sui and Ma Teng brought their forces to Chang'an.Dong Zhuo died soon afterwards, and now Li Jue and the others made Han Sui General Who Maintains the West in Peace and sent him back to Jincheng, while Ma Teng became General Who Subdues the West and was sent to camp at Mei.
The Administrator of Dong commandery, Qiao Mao, forged letters as if sent by the excellencies in the capital to the provinces and commanderies. Listing the faults and crimes of Dong Zhuo, they went on to say that, "We are oppressed and can do nothing to help ourselves. We look eagerly for loyal troops to free the state from danger and harm."
A son of Kou Rong's elder cousin married the emperor's younger sister, the Senior Princess of Yiyang, and the emperor also took a great-niece of Kou Rong into the harem. The attendants became increasingly resentful of him, so they joined in slander to accuse him of some crime.
Xun You and Guo Jia said, "Lü Bu is brave, but he has no senseof planning. He has fought you several times and has always beendriven back.
I myself lack ability, whether for civil affairs or matters of war, and I am quite unworthy of this high position.Even if I give my life in your service, I cannot make adequate recompense [for this honour and trust].
Then Wang Rui saw Sun Jian, and he was alarmed and said, "The men may want rewards, but why is Magistrate Sun here?"
The Protector of the Army Pang Ji had long been an enemy ofShen Pei. Yuan Shao asked him about the matter, and he [292]replied, "Shen Pei is fiercely honest and always respects theexamples of the ancients. He could not turn traitor just because histwo sons are in the south.
and was delighted, saying, "Gongda is quite exceptional!
Chen Rong, a man from the same town as Zang Hong, had admired him since he was young. He was at this time in the assembly with Yuan Shao, and he stood up and said, "You have embarked upon a great work, to end the violence in the empire. Yet you begin by killing a loyal, honest man. Does this match the will of Heaven? Zang Hong took up arms for the chief of his commandery. How can you kill him?"
Many of Xun Yu's fellow-villagers who had stayed behind were killed by Li Jue and Guo Si.
Liu Biao attacked Zhang Xian,66 but for several years he gained noheadway.
Before this, when Fan Pang and his fellows criticised the imperial government, all officials from the excellencies down humbly accepted their admonitions. The students of the Imperial University contended with one another to follow their example. They believed that an age of civil learning was about to dawn, and that scholars in retirement would be restored to positions in the official service.
but he was really quite annoyed, and in the end he killed him.
Then Lü Bu said to Ji Ling and his party, "Xuande [Liu Bei]51is my younger brother. He is in trouble with you, and I have come tohelp him.
All the other men of the army that surrendered were buriedalive by Cao Cao. More than seventy thousand men were killedfrom first to last.
being Chapter 58 of the Chronicle of Han
The whole empire cries out, and for this reason alone you should punish them and remove them so as to purify the court."
Realising that he was doomed, Gongsun Zanstrangled his sisters, his wives and his children, and prepared hisown funeral pyre.
In the north Jing province holds the Han and the Mian, and it gains vast profit from the southern sea. East it joins with Wu and Kuaiji, west it reaches to Ba and Shu.30 Here is a country which is valuable in war, yet its master cannot hold it. It is almost as if Heaven is giving it to you.
The Administrator Ren Yin abandoned his city and fled, and the rebel forces grew to several tens of thousands.
As soon as Sun Jian received it he led his troops against Wang Rui.
Liu Bei made plans with Dong Cheng, with the Colonel of theChang River Regiment Chong Ji and the generals Wu Zilan andWang Fu.
The soldiers east of the mountains are in rebellion. We cannot put them down immediately, so we shift the capital to deal with them properly. This is just like the time of Qin and early Han."
So he became friends with him, and Guo Tai's reputation spread throughout the region of the capital.
Now they arerivals for power, and each has his own party.
Yu Fan said to Lü Meng, "This campaign needs a delicate touch. We should leave a garrison in the city and have Shi Ren accompany us."
The Lady Xu called Sun Gao and Fu Ying to stand behind herdoor as she sent someone to invite Gui Lan.
An edict with this argument was sent to Duan Jiong for comment. He replied, "It has always been my opinion that though the Eastern Qiang are very numerous they are nonetheless weak and easy to control. Upon that basis I first put forward my humble plan, designed for a lasting peace. In contrast, the General of the Household [Zhang Huan] argued that since the enemy were strong and difficult to conquer we should be lenient and accept their surrender.
Sun Quan held examination of those junior officers who had fewsoldiers and were therefore less useful, and he combined their troops to make larger units.
Ju Shou objected, "You haveonly just dealt with Gongsun Zan, and your army has been awayseveral years. The people are sick and distressed and the granariesand storehouses are empty.
Zhang Huan took Huangfu Gui's place as General on the Liao, and Huangfu Gui became Emissary to the Xiongnu.
Then there is a regular succession, so powerful men limit theirambitions, and the hearts of the people are satisfied. The highest position is held steadily by one family, and power rests with a single man.
In the intercalary [fifth] month on the day gengchen [24 Jul], last of the month, there was an eclipse of the sun.
"You were invited to take an appointment and have turned it down," said the messenger. "Nothing was said about shifting the capital, yet you raise the matter. Why is this?"
Gongsun Zan attacked Yuan Shao, but as his army reached Longcou Yuan Shao attacked and defeated him.
Zhang Yan, leader of the Black Mountain bandits, sent a messengerto Cao Cao offering assistance, and Cao Cao appointed him GeneralWho Pacifies the North.
Sun Quan sent envoys to win him over. Guan Yu pretended to surrender, but set pennons and flags on the wall to look like men and then fled away. All his soldiers had scattered, and he had no more than a dozen horsemen with him.
In the second month on the day jiyou [28 Mar] there was a fire in the Cloud Terrace of the Southern Palace.
When Liu Zhang invited Liu Bei, Liu Ba objected, "Liu Bei is an ambitious man. If he comes he will certainly cause harm."
We beg to finish this business, then go to the Minister of Justice for punishment."
When the Yellow Turbans rebelled [in 184] he took command of his own forces and the people of the kingdomfeared him and did not dare to [223] rebel.
Cao Cao now appointed Han Ji as Junior Clerk in the Department of Officials under the Imperial Chancellor, and Pei Qian as Adviser to the Army of the Imperial Chancellor. He Xia, Liu Yi and Wang Can became clerical officers, and Sima Zhi wasmade magistrate of Jian. Each of them had established a fine reputation among the people.
Yuan Shu at one time promised he would make Sun Ce the Administrator of Jiujiang, but then he changed his mind and appointed Chen Ji of Danyang.
Hou Lan had a particular enmity for Zhang Jian.Zhu Bing was a man from the same district as Hou Lan; he was always deceitful and corrupt, and had been rejected by Zhang Jian.48 With guidance from Hou Lan, he sent in a report that Zhang Jian and twenty-three others from his district had given themselves titles and had formed a factious association. They had elected Zhang Jian as their leader, and they were planning to bring the nation into danger.
The Imperial Secretariat criticised him for attacking so many, and suggested he was making his accusations out of personal malice.
I realise that the processes for these enfeoffments are already under way, and it is at this stage too late to reconsider them, but I really hope that your majesty will now call a halt.
Gongsun Zan was angry and said, "My cousin is dead, and Yuan Shao is to blame."
In the summer, in the fourth month Ma Teng was made General Who Gives Tranquillity to the Northern Barbarians and Han Sui was made General Who Gives Tranquillity to the Submissive.
You bear the surname Lü, replied Wang Yun, "and he is no true relation by blood.
Before this, Guo Jia had gone to see Yuan Shao, who treated himwith the utmost courtesy. After a few weeks, however, he observedto Yuan Shao's counsellors Xin Ping and Guo Tu, "A man who iswise takes care to examine his master. He will never come to harmthen, and he will be able to establish a good reputation.
So Yuan Shao divided Ju Shou's authority and appointed threeChief Controllers, with Ju Shou, Guo Tu and Chunyu Qiong eachcommanding one army.
In the fifth month on the day dingrnao [7 Jun] there was an amnesty for the empire.
Yuan Shao brought troops to besiege him but a year went by and he still held out.
At this time, Cao Cao had ordered Chen Gong to lead a force into camp in Dong commandery, so Chen Gong now took his army and secretly invited Lu Bu to come and take over as Governor of Yan province.
The emperor went on a hunting expedition to the Shanglin Park. He travelled through the Hangu Pass and also made a tour to the Guangcheng Park.
Before this, Lu Su had urged Sun Quan that so long as Cao Caolived he should stay in harmony with Guan Yu and maintain the alliance. They should never break off with him.
The emperor recalled how the Dowager Dou had brought him to the throne and, as recognition of this, in the winter in the tenth month on the day wuzi [16 Nov], first of the month, he brought all the officials to pay their respects to the Dowager in the Southern Palace. The emperor himself gave gifts and offered her good wishes for long life.
Since Lord Cao's army had only justbegun its withdrawal, he was sure to command the rear-guard. Thatis why I knew you would be defeated.
As he was marching, the leaders of Taishan, Zang Ba, SunGuan, Wu Dun, Yin Li, Chang Xi and others all joined Lü Bu.
Chen Fan said to Dou Wu, "The only way of dealing with these fellows is to arrest and kill them. What is the point of putting them further to the question?"
In the intercalary [seventh] month on the day jiawu [25 Aug?] there was a fire in the Office of Northern Tranquillity in the Southern Palace.
The Minister of Finance Zhang Huan wrote in as follows: "In former times the burial of the Duke of Zhou was [planned to be] held without proper rites, and Heaven showed its power.
Then Guan Ning came to Gongsun Du and, having met him, went to build a hut in a mountain valley.
2: 185 AD
Some time before this, Tao Qian had appointed Zhai Rong as Chancellor of Xiapi and sent him to take charge of the official grain transport from Guangling, Xiapi and Pengcheng.
Liu Biao was extremely angry,and Han Ji became frightened, so he obeyed the summons. He was appointed magistrate of Yicheng.
Liu Kui, King of Bohai, frequently acted wildly and eccentrically, and had several times showed himself presumptuous, proud and disobedient of the law.
Sun Jian sighed and said, "Together we raised loyal troops to save the nation. Now the rebels and bandits are almost destroyed, yet each can act like this. Whom can I work with?"
When the emperor received this document he was extremely angry. An edict was issued to the Director of Retainers and to Yi province, that Cao Luan should be arrested and sent in a cage cart to the prison at Huaili. He was flogged to death with the bastinado.
but Teng Yan, Chancellor of Jibei, arrested them all, killed several dozen of them and laid out the bodies along the road.
Clients and dependents of the two men criticised the other, and each established a particular following.
Even though the state may grant me undue consideration, how can I face my own conscience?
"Now the Imperial University and the Eastern Lodge are quite enough to maintain scholarship and sagely cultivation. I ask that selection through the [School at the Gate of the] Vast Capital be abolished. This would remove the scandal from the empire."
A In the spring, in the first month the emperor performed the ceremony of Ascending the Tomb at Yuanling.1
Shan Bing was suspicious and would not accept the edict, so Wang Fu struck and killed him. He also killed Yin Xun. Then he released Zheng Li and brought his soldiers back to seize the Dowager and take her seal and ribbon.
he let nothing slip by him, and he never allowed Cao Zhi any latitude. As a result, the two did not get on.
The Grand Prolonger of Autumn Cao Jie, Marquis of Huarong, died. The Regular Attendant Zhao Zhong took his place as Grand Prolonger of Autumn.
Some time later, as the emperor was looking over some earlier records, he found the memorials written by Yang Ci and Liu Tao to warn against Zhang Jue. He enfeoffed Yang Ci as Marquis of Linjin and Liu Tao as Marquis of Zhongling District.
Zhadu is a few dozen li south ofhere. Go that way and get behind him. You will be attacking wherehe is not prepared and breaking out where he least expects it."
By this time Cao Cao had already reached Wan, and Liu Bei was surprised and greatly alarmed.You people did this, he said to Song Zhong, "and you gave me not a word of warning. Now, when disaster has come, you at last let me know. Isn't that the limit!"
About this time he became very ill, and he entrusted Liu Xie to the care of Jian Shi.
Liu Gui, Zhang Ren and Liu Zhang's son Xun retreated to holdLuo city, but Liu Bei led his army forward and surrounded them.
Cao Ren said, "Those districts in the south know that our army isfacing a crisis, and they realise we cannot bring help. If Liu Beicomes with a strong force it is quite reasonable for them to turn away from us. Liu Bei,
He Miao, however, and the Lady of Wuyang who was mother to the Dowager, 23 had often received bribes and gifts from the eunuchs. They realised that He Jin wanted to kill the attendants, and they spoke several times to the Dowager so she would give them protection.
If you act too quickly, you will force them to help one another."
Suspicious at the change of policy, Dong Zhuo sent men at arms to threaten Chong Shao.
Cao Cao sent Liu Bei to Zang Ba with orders to send the headsof the two men, but Zang Ba replied, "The reason I have made aposition for myself is because I do not do behave like that.
It is for my own benefit, not just for you!"
Zhou Yu sent in a memorial to Sun Quan saying, "Liu Bei is acruel fierce leader, and he has Guan Yu and Zhang Fei as officerslike bears or tigers. They will never agree to serve anyone else forlong.
Sun Ce then crossed the Yangzi and fought one battle after another. All who faced him were defeated and none dared match themselves against him.
As a result of this, Zhang Rang found a way to get Wang Yun into trouble, and Wang Yun was sent to prison. An amnesty was issued soon afterwards and he was re-appointed Inspector, but little more than a week later he was summonsed again on another charge.
At this time in Luoyang the mansions of the nobility and the imperial relatives stood one beside the other, every house filled with treasure of gold and silk. Dong Zhuo let his soldiers loose to break into these buildings, to plunder the property and to force into marriage the wives and daughters of their families, regardless and unsparing of high position or connection to the throne. T
Han Fu and Yuan Shao wrote to Yuan Shu to say, "The emperor is not a true son of Xiao-Ling.3 We want to act like [the Marquis of] Jiang and Guan [Ying] in former times, when they punished and deposed a puppet ruler, and welcomed the King of Dai to his place. 4 We plan to set up the Grand Marshal Liu Yu as Emperor."
Jiang Xu told Xiahou Yuan of the emergency, but Xiahou Yuan's officers recommended that he wait for orders from Cao Cao.
Wang Huan remarked, "A thicket of thorns is not the nest for a phoenix, and a hundred li is not enough for a man of worth."
Again, there was a time he rode in a chariot drawn by four donkeys, managing the reins himself, and raced around the park. All the capital imitated the new fashion, and the price of donkeys rose to equal that of horses.
"On the other hand, if you fail to use the strength that you have, but call in help from outside, then great armies will gather and the strongest will win. That is like turning a spear against yourself and passing the handle to someone else. The project will surely fail, and you will have embarked upon a road to ruin."
Gao Gan thought well of himself and was not pleased at what Zhongchang Tong said, so Zhongchang Tong left him.
"War has its changes," replied Jia Xu. "Follow him quickly."
Her father Song Feng, Marquis of Buqi District, and her brothers all suffered execution.
Then Zong Ziqing climbed over the city wall by night, joined the Administrator, and together they collected the rest of the people to besiege Hou Yin. Soon afterwards Cao Ren's army arrived to join the attack.
Zhang Liao, Li Dian and Yue Jin had a combined force of some seven thousand men stationed at that city.
Take the opportunity to arrestthem, go forward and take over their command, then turn againstChengdu. This is the second-best plan.
Before Lü Meng could receive his enfeoffment [as Marquis of Chanling] his illness broke out most violently. Sun Quan took him in, set him next to his own lodging and sought every possible cure.
The Grand Commandant Yang Biao said, "It is a rule since ancient times that an emperor or a king should never take up residence in another man's house. You gentlemen are engaged in a great cause. How can you act like this?" "
"But you have always disliked him?" asked Yuan Shao.
Seizing Han Zhong by the neck, he brought him to the floorand drew a sword to cut his head off.
When Wang Yun arrived [at the Ministry of Justice at the capital], the General-in-Chief He Jin sent in a memorial jointly with Yang Ci and Yuan Wei to plead for his life, and they obtained a remission of his charges.
"Yuan Shao and Cao Cao are presently at peace," observed his comrades, "and Zang Hong holds his appointment through Yuan Shao.He will not upset the good [relations between Yuan and Cao] and bring down misfortune [by such involvement]."
I would rather die on the same day as Zang Hong than live under the same sun as you."
but Sun Ce was badly hurt. He called in Zhang Zhao and others and said to them, "CentralChina is now in confusion. With the forces of Wu and Yue and thesecurity of the Three Streams [the Yangzi], we can observe othermen's success and failure without being involved.
According to the Shibao prophecies we should shift the capital to Chang'an to follow the will of Heaven and Man."
He went out to encourage the troops and inspect the lines, all the officers accepted his orders, and morale was restored.
Liu Biao sent Huang Zu to go secretly by night to gather reinforcements, but as he was on his way back Sun Jian faced and fought with him. Huang Zu was defeated and fled into the Xian hills.
but this was his only weakness, and not enough to discount his two fine actions.
The main body went over first, andCao Cao stayed behind with a few hundred Tiger Warriors on thesouth bank to hold the rear.
In the autumn, in the seventh month, the Colonel of the Archers Who Shoot at a Sound Ma Midi became Grand Commandant.
The emperor heard about this, and Li Su was summonsed and publicly executed.Liu Du and Ma Mu were both sentenced to death, commuted by one degree.Hu Shuang's household was granted exemption from taxes, and one man of his family was appointed as a Gentleman.
In the spring, in the first month on the day jiwei,there was an amnesty for the empire.
The Grand Commandant Ma Midi said to Wang Yun, "Bojie [Cai Yong] is one of the world’s rare and unusual talents, he knows a great deal of the affairs of Han, and he should continue and complete the later history. This is one of the great works of our times. His fault is slight.
The empress was a woman from a butcher's family in Nanyang. She had been brought into the harem by selection, and then bore the emperor a son, Liu Bian. It was for this reason she was made empress.
Li Ying was still more angry and resentful, and in the end he exposed the full situation and had the man killed.
When the proscription of the men of Faction was ended [in 184],Zhang Jian returned to his native place [in Shanyang commandery]. He later became Minister of the Guards, and he died at the age of eighty four.
The Inspector of Qing province, Jiao He, had also raised troops to attack Dong Zhuo. He made every effort to join the other leaders in the march to the west, but he had prepared no defences for his own people, and even as his soldiers crossed the Yellow River the Yellow Turbans were already within his borders.38
Liu Bei wanted to call Lu Su and some others for a council of war, but Zhou Yu said, "I have my orders, and I am not going to avoid responsibility.
In the winter, in the tenth month on the day guiwei [27 Oct], first of the month, there was an eclipse of the sun.
The best place is Yuzhang: north it joins the territory of Yu, and in the west it marches with Jing province."Gather the officials and people, send messengers [to the court with] tribute, and make contact with Cao Cao in Yan province. Though Yuan Gonglu [Yuan Shu] stands between the two of you, he is selfish and cruel like a wolf or a jackal, and he will certainly not last long.
The enemy will seek to fight but will not be able to, and when they attack they will not succeed. Their army will certainly break apart.
and he issued orders by training his women to shout in unison so they could be heard at several hundred paces.
According to my humble observations, for the last several years,every sprout of grain has been consumed by locusts and other pests,and every scrap of cloth8 is taken away by the demands of government [taxation] or by private [landlords and usurers].
Cao Cao recommended Gongsun Du as General Who is Firm andMajestic, with enfeoffment as Marquis of Yongning District. "I ruleLiaodong like a king,"
Nevertheless, when a man remains too long as apowerful subject, people will always suspect that he is planning totake over. You must consider this carefully."
In the twelfth month Pan Zhang's Major Ma Zhong caught Guan Yu and his son Qing at Zhangxiang and beheaded them.So Jing province was settled.
In the eighth month the Grand Judge of WEI Zhong Yao became Chancellor of State.
If Du Shang is not summoned, I shall bury myself here in this prison cage. I shall never consent to a meaningless release. As long as I live, I shall bear witness to this injustice."
Soon afterwards, when trouble did strike, the provincial and commandery offices arrested Li Ji and Li Zi, and both died in prison.
Liu Bei said to Liu Dai and his fellows, "I can deal with you and ahundred like you, but if Lord Cao came himself I would feel lesscertain."
In the second month, Zhang Jue named himself Lord of Heaven General, his younger brother Zhang Bao was named Lord of Earth General, and Zhang Bao's younger brother Zhang Liang was named Lord of Man General.Government offices everywhere were burned down, towns and villages were looted, and provincial and commandery administrations were forced to abandon their offices; most of the officials ran away. Within a few weeks the whole empire had responded to the rebellion, and the capital was in fear and trembling.
Intending to join Yuan Shang and break up the siege, Shen Peimade a sortie to the north of the city.
Before this, Han Fu's Assistant Officers Zhao Fu and Cheng Huan had led ten thousand Strong Bowmen to camp at the Meng Crossing.They heard what was going on and brought their men quickly back.
？
With such a degree of mental concentration, one may then achieve the true Way.
Officials were incorrupt and the people kept good order.
And now it is proposed that we should use the common people against this horde. The imperial authority will be disgraced among the outer barbarians. Even if everything goes as it is claimed it will, this is nonetheless a source of danger. And how much worse will it prove if the fighting does not go according to plan!"
The Administrator of Cangwu, Zhang Xu, had been captured by the rebels. Both he and Ren Yin were summoned to the capital and sentenced to public execution.
Chang Xi rebelled again, and Cao Cao sent Yu Jin, who attacked and beheaded him.
This man, you go to visit, explained Xu Shu. "You can't make him come to you. You must be prepared to attend him yourself."
"If a man is going into combat, and he cuts offhis right hand and says, 'I am certain to win,' how can that be?
My only regrets are that my humble ambitions are notyet achieved, and that I shall never again receive your teaching andguidance.
Cao Cao planned to attack the Wuhuan, but his officers said, "Yuan Shang is an enemy in flight. The barbarians think only of themselves and have no feeling of affection for him; why should they be any use to him?
NowCao Cao is like Xiang Yu, and how can you manage like Huan orWen?
Hao Jie and Hu Wu, both men from Taiyuan, enjoyed high principles and forthright argument, and they had been very good friends with Yuan Zhu.On a later occasion they sent in to the offices of the Three Excellencies a list they had prepared jointly, with the names of good scholars from all over the empire whom they recommended for office.They never paid a courtesy call on Liang Ji.
When that is done, you can discussthe rights and wrongs of the situation. Surely that is the best policy?
Ten thousand men with one idea in their minds would be too much to handle, and we have a hundred thousand to deal with!
If I have committed the ultimate and most heinous crime against every form of morality, worthy to be staked out in the open, with the knives prepared for torture, then your majesty should make public proclamation of my faults, so thesuspicions of those who examine the matter may be put at rest.
He held a great banquet, raised a toast to Xu Huang and said, "It was your good work that saved Fan and Xiangyang."
Xin Pi arrived at Xiping, saw Cao Cao and gave him Yuan Tan'smessage. Many of those in attendance held that Liu Biao was [321]strong and should be settled first, while Yuan Tan and Yuan Shangwere no longer a concern.
In the spring, in the first month on the day xinyou [21 Feb] there was an amnesty for the empire.
YuanShao accepted Guo Tu's arguments. Encouraged by this, Guo Tu and his associates spoke furtheragainst Ju Shou, saying, "Ju Shou supervises everything, withauthority inside and out. His power overawes the army. If he becomes too mighty, how will you keep him under control? When aminister wields the same power as his ruler, disaster is sure to come.This is what the Yellow Stone [book] warns against.
and the eunuchs now held a deadly hatred for Chen Fan. Many of his recommendations for office and his memorials were turned down or rejected.
Moreover, when the late Emperor has only just left the world, how can I act so brazenly as to deal with men face to face?"He Jin found it difficult to disregard the Dowager's feelings, but he still wanted to punish the evil-doers.
Hu Guang was experienced in matters of precedent, and could understand and explain any court regulations. For this reason there was a saying current in the capital, "When a myriad affairs are out of order, just ask Boshi; for charting a middle course, there is Lord Hu."
"I beg that you give publicity to my humble submission, to let it be known to the hundred officials that punishment must be meted out with justice and equity.
Now the beginnings of good fortune certainly depend upon a man being lucky, but their fulfilment in prosperity requires that he shall then prove to be of excellent character. If virtue is present, then we have the beginnings[of good fortune]; but if virtue is not present, those are signs of disaster.
Now that Yang Qiu had executed Wang Fu, he wanted to proceed further with a memorial against Cao Jie and his party. So he gave instructions to his Assistant Officer for Officials at the Capital, "My first priority is the chief rascals among the powerful and the honoured [the eunuchs and others within the palace], then I shall consider the rest.
"In earlier times," said Xun Yu, "Gaozu took the land within the passes, and Emperor Guangwu occupied Henei. Both set their control of the empire on deep roots and a secure base. When they advanced they could defeat their enemies, and if they were forced to retreat they could still maintain their ground. They were sometimes defeated, but in the end they achieved the great work and conquered the empire.
but what is the point if you cook the hawk and eat it yourself?"
Cao Cao led his troops forward against the Yellow Turbans east of Shouzhang,
I respectfully resubmit these eight immediate and urgent points."
"But now Yuzhou is acting selfishly. He glosses over facts, he offends virtue and he disregards good conduct. He has already put his hand on the western province, and now he wants to take Jing territory as well. Even the most ordinary fellow would be ashamed, still more so a ruler who should arrange and order men and affairs!"
In recognition of his good work, Chen Deng was promoted GeneralWho Calms the Waves.
I ask you not to take it at this time, for if you do you will bringdown misfortune."
In the winter, in the tenth month Cao Cao stormed Pengcheng.
None of them, however, are any use in dealing with military matters, and now they have taken up arms against you they are simply not in your class.
The court was concerned that it might not be possible to keep Tanshihuai under control, so messengers were sent with seal and ribbon to enfeoff him as a king and to offer peace and alliance.
About this time, the Honoured Lady Yu of Emperor Shun died, and all the officials assembled for the funeral. As they returned, Cao Jie saw the corpse of Wang Fu exposed by the road [outside the Xia Gate]. He brushed away his tears with a sigh and said, "We bite and eat one another. How can it be that dogs now lick his carcass?"
He also set out ceremonies for marriage and for the courses taught in the schools.He proclaimed these among the people, and all found them easy to follow. Eventually the government was so well maintained that things found on the road were not touched [but left there for their owners to collect].
Liu Bei besieged the city for several weeks, and then he sent his Gentleman of the General Staff Jian Yong of Zhuo commandery to go in and talk with Liu Zhang.
Whenever he saw an old man, he would chat with him about the affairs of farming and the village.
Chen Yi, son of the former Grand Tutor Chen Fan, met the master of astrology Xiang Kai at the residence of Wang Fen the Inspector of Ji province. Xiang Kai said, "The stars are unfavourable to the eunuchs. All the Yellow Gates officers and the Regular Attendants will surely be destroyed."
In the emperor's opinion, Liu Bian was frivolous and lacked dignity, and he was thinking of awarding the succession to Liu Xie, but he had made no final decision.
Sun Quan had at one time suggested a marriage alliance for his son with [a daughter of] Guan Yu, but Guan Yu abused the messenger and refused the marriage. Sun Quan was angry.
being Chapter 54 of the Chronicle of Han
He said, "In former times, there were no eunuch officials. It was only at the end of the reign of Emperor Wu, when he went often to the harem, that they were first established."
So for the time being Zhang He became head of the army.
When I asked my officers for advice, not one of them had anything to suggest, while Zhang Zibu [Zhang Zhao] and Qin Wenbiao [Qin Song] both said that we should send tribute and receive Cao Cao.
"Now, however, we have all these scholars contending for advantage, and there is a ferment of composition. At the highest level, they use the classics for commentary and parable. At the worst, they produce haphazard collections of common gossip. One could compare it to a variety show. And quite frequently they copy others, to such a degree that it is plagiarism.
Cao Pi sent a man to ask the Palace Counsellor Jia Xu how he mightkeep himself secure.
You have treatedGongtai no more generously than Cao Cao did, yet you intend toleave him the whole city, abandoning your wife and children, andgo off alone with your army. If there is a sudden change, how wouldI be your wife any more?"
Duan Jiong replied, "In my humble opinion, though the Xianlian and other Eastern Qiang have often made rebellion, more than twenty thousand groups have surrendered to Huangfu Gui. 11 So the good have been sorted from the bad, and the remaining bandits are no great number.
Geng Bi the Inspector of Liang province led the troops of six commanderies to attack Han Sui.
When the officers in Xu city heard Yuan Shao was coming, theywere all afraid.
Now, while the empire is still not settled, how can we be a danger to one another?"
"Duan Wei is a suspicious man," replied Jia Xu, "and worriedabout what I intend to do. Though he treats me generously now,
In the autumn, in the seventh month Cao Cao led the attack on MaChao and the others.
In the eleventh month the Grand Commandant Chen Qiu left office.
The excellencies, ministers and other officials keep their mouths shut and are silent; none dare to speak out.
Ma Midi asked to leave, but Yuan Shu held him and refused to allow him to proceed, and he tried to compel Ma Midi to act as his Master of the Army.
In the ninth month Cao Cao came to Xinye.Bearing his insigniaof office, Liu Zong went to receive him and surrender the province.
4: 181 AD
"but what concerns me is that YuanShao may make trouble in the lands within the passes. If he stirs upthe Qiang and other barbarians in the west, and urges on Shu andHan in the south, then I shall be facing five-sixths of the empirewith only Yan province and Yu.
The remainder of the people, several million of them, were driven away to Chang'an.
Han Sui and Ma Chao fled to Liang province, and Yang Qiu toAnding.
On the other hand, if they keep their camps together from winter into spring and do not spread out, the men and their animals will waste and die; they will be destroyed by their very strength. So all [Zhang Huan] does is encourage surrenders, for in that way a strong enemy can be kept under control without taking action.
HHS 8:331 (3b), the Annals of Emperor Ling.Jianning 3: 170 AD 4 February 170 - 22 February 171
Sun Ce wanted title as general to enhance [222] his position,so Wang Pu took the authority to grant him provisional appointmentas General Who Glorifies Han.
Yuan Shao made Ju Shou of Guangping General Who Displays Firmness, with responsibility as Supervisor and Protector over all his officers, and he treated him with great favour.
The barbarians of Changsha made a rebellion and ravaged Yiyang county.
All commanderies and counties saw how the wind was blowing and made their peace with Liu Bei. Only Huang Quan closed his city [of Guanghan] and held firm. He submitted only after Liu Zhang had surrendered.
Unless the core of our state is at peace, it will bedifficult to make plans for places further afield. On the other hand, we can organise those people into divisions and units, and we can get good soldiers from them."
Xu Chu of Pei state was braver and stronger than other men. Hecollected several thousand young people and members of his clan,and made firm defences and strong walls to keep out bandits.
The fathers and elder brothers, sons and younger brothers of Cao Jie and Wang Fu were appointed as ministers, colonels, governors, administrators and magistrates. They spread across the empire, and wherever they held office they were greedy and cruel.
"As a result, if we now favour them with positions, then even the highest ranks will be held in disrepute, and if we show them grace, then our greatest kindness will be held in contempt.
Should youdelay without making some move, however, you will be in greatdifficulty. You cannot wait too long."
Ma Teng and Han Sui were defeated and fled, and Fan Chou pursued them to Chencang. Han Sui said to Fan Chou, "Though we may be at war, we have no personal quarrel
In the winter, in the tenth month on the day jiashen [17 Dec], last of the month, there was an eclipse of the sun.
On the day gengshen [1 Jan 196?] the emperor came out [from Caoyang] and went east. Dong Cheng and Li Le guarded the imperial carriage, Hu Cai, Yang Feng, Han Xian and the Worthy King of the West of the Xiongnu were in the rear as guards.
Now that you have destroyed Hanzhong, everyone in SHU will be shaken and frightened and their power will fell of its own accord.
"In my opinion, the prohibitions currently established by the Law of the Three Relationships should be simplified.
How could he claim that all my Regular Attendants are bad?"
Huang Fu of Runan, who was Chancellor of Donghai, heard about this. He arrested every member of Xu Xuan's household and examined them [by torture] without regard whether they were old or young.
When the Yellow Turbans came to plunder, Kong Rong foughtand was defeated. He fled to take refuge in Duchang.
Any administrator or magistrate with something to hide abandoned his seal and ribbon and fled away as soon as he heard Fan Pang was coming.In every memorial and report that he sent in, Fan Pang gave full expression to the opinions of the people.
After Chen Fan had been dismissed, all the ministers at court were frightened, and none now dared to speak in favour of the men of Faction.
and some of his clerical officers urged Chen Qiu to send his family away out of danger. Chen Qiu replied angrily, "I hold the tiger tally from my government,29 and I have been given charge of this territory. How can I concern myself with wife and children if I harm the authority of the state by doing so? The next man to make any such suggestion will be executed." Then he had great trees strung to make bows, and feathered whole lances to make arrows, and he had a device to draw the weapon and fire it. Many of the enemy were killed or wounded.
By imperial edict, Yang Xuan was completely exonerated and was appointed as a Consultant. Zhao Kai was punished for his slander.
[In the ninth month] on the day jisi [16 Oct] the emperorentered Cao Cao's camp, appointed Cao Cao as General-in-Chiefand enfeoffed him as Marquis of Wuping.
Sun Quan sent men with a stretcher to go to his house and fetch him, but Pan Jun lay face down on his bed and refused to get up. Tears flowing in all directions, he wailed and could not control himself.
When they captured the city, all his men discarded their weapons to go to the storehouses, and they fought one another for plunder.
"If what they say is true," replied He Xia, "then Mao Jie's fault is indeed serious, an offence to the sight of Heaven and Earth.
In this year Sun Quan went west to attack Huang Zu. He captured his people and came back.
Chen Yu took fright and retreated to Xiapi. Then Yuan Shu took over his territory and claimed the additional title "Lord of Xu province."
Those who do return, however, are prevented from attending to theirown affairs, for local chieftains compete with one another to take them and press them into service.
He also appointed Yuan Shu as General of the Rear and Cao Cao as Colonel of Resolute Cavalry.
So the emperor called Shan Chao and Zuo Guan to come to him,and said, "General Liang and his brothers have taken all power at the court, and they are aggressive and oppressive both inside and out.From the excellencies and ministers on down, all the officials follow their instructions and accept their influence. Now I want to punish them. What do you, my palace attendants, think of this?"
I wish your majesty would publish my memorial to all your attendants, so the evil-doers of the empire may know of my hatred for them."
Fei Zhan, a leader of bandits in Danyang, made trouble about this time and encouraged the Shanyue to join him.
He drew up histroops, several ten thousand in number, and sacrificed a white horseto confirm the covenant, giving orders that, "Anyone who turnsaway will be killed."
and in this way hepassed through Cao Cao's camp and came to the southern face of thesiege opposite the Zhang Gate. Again, he found fault with the menon picket duty, arrested them and tied them up.
The ditch about Guan Yu's headquarters had ten rings of abatis, but Xu Huang pursued Guan Yu into his defences and defeated him. Fu Fang and Hu Xiu both died.Then Guan Yu broke off the siege and retreated. His fleet, however, still controlled the Mian River, and Xiangyang remained isolated with no communication to the outside.
I spoke to you, said Cao Cao, "but you did not answer. Why not?"
Those who had informed against him now reported again, "Even as a convict, Cui Yan curls up his beard and glares at anyone who visits him. He appears resentfiil."
Yuan Shu wrote to Lü Bu, urging him to attack Xiapi, and promised him help with his supplies.
If we block the passes and maintain a garrison in Shan, though we might settle the people from Liang province, we would make the east of the passes suspicious. We cannot do that."
and when the main army went out on campaign he arranged for the [regular] officers to take them over as volunteers. Once they had left, he sent their families off to Ye, and in one way or another he transferred tens of thousands of people there.If anyone disobeyed he raised troops to attack them, and he took more than a thousand heads. Tens of thousands of others submitted and joined him.
On the day wuwu [15 May] Prince Bian was established as Emperor. He was fourteen years old.
If you pardon the crimes of that group of evildoers because of your generous and gentle nature, then all their wicked plots will come to fruition together, and though you will later have regrets, what can then be done?
When the Assistant Officer of Yi province, Zheng Du of Guanghan,heard that Liu Bei had raised troops, he said to Liu Zhang, "The General of the Left [Liu Bei] is attacking us with an isolated army.He has no more than ten thousand troops and they are not yetattached to him. His army has no baggage train and his soldiersmust live off the country.
Dong Zhuo cursed him, "Useless dog, you dare do this?"
Guo Jia told Cao Cao, and then Cao Cao said to Xin Pi, "Can Itrust Yuan Tan? Can I be sure to defeat Yuan Shang?" "Your Excellency need have no concern about Yuan Tan'sreliability," replied Xin Pi. "You have only to consider his militarystrength.
When Zhou Yu arrived, he said to Sun Quan, "Though Cao Cao pretends to be a minister of Han, he is in fact the enemy of the state.
About this time Que Jian, the Inspector of Yi province, was causing unrest by his levies for government service, and reports were heard far off. Then Geng Bi and Zhang Yi were killed by bandits; and so the court followed Liu Yan's advice. They chose men of ministerial rank and from the Imperial [206] Secretariat to be Governors of provinces, each to hold office according to his original salary.
And before this he sent a letter to Cao Cao pretending he wanted to surrender.
"Through your own personal qualities, and by your close relationship to the throne, you hold the authority of Aheng, with power to make your own decisions and to take your own action against criminals. It is quite inappropriate for you to favour Dong Zhuo by asking for his assistance.
Of course it is difficult to determine a man's true character, but that is all the more reason to examine each case fully, hearing both sides to determine the facts.
The soldiers of the regiments [of the Northern Army] had always been accustomed to fear the authority of the palace officials, so Dou Wu's followers gradually came over to Wang Fu.Between dawn and the time of the morning meal almost all Dou Wu's men changed sides.
Several tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry were drawn up, they made defended camps and formed line of battle.
For fear of Cao Cao, Yuan Shu's cousin Yuan Yin dared notremain at Shouchun. With Yuan Shu's coffin and his wife and child ren, he fled with his followers to Liu Xun, Administrator of Lujiang,at Huan city.
Li Xian memorialised in turn, "I observe that the Virtuous Empress Dou of Emperor Zhang ill-treated and brought the death of [the Lady Liang, who was posthumously honoured as] the Respectful and Remembered Empress. And the family of the Thoughtful Empress Yan of Emperor An was wicked, treacherous and rebellious. Yet Emperor He never had any intention of arranging a separate tomb [for the Empress Dou], and the court of Emperor Shun entertained no proposal for the demotion [of the Empress Yan].
His property and treasure were confiscated, while his wife and [other] children were exiled to Bijing.
Zhang Lu taught superstition. Those who were sick were requiredto confess their sins, and he said prayers for them. It was of nopractical help in curing them, but masses of ignorant people,confused and foolish, vied with one another to serve him.
In the spring, in the first month on the day xinchou [2 Mar], there was an amnesty for the empire.
In my opinion, the Yellow River holds the position of the feudal lords.
Lü Bu, however, presumed upon his credit with the Yuan clan and allowed his soldiers to plunder and rob,
Liu Yan became steadily more ambitious. He had an Imperial Coach made for himself, with more than a thousand other carriages of state.66 Liu Biao sent in a memorial [85] observing that "Liu Yan is like Zixia, and people west of the Yellow River mistake him for the sage."
"I believe that this commandery should come under the rulesfor distant areas and new states, so that minor affairs among thepeople are dealt with by chiefs and civil officials according tocircumstance. Above, such a policy will follow the correct model,and below it will accord with the feeling of the people.
The magistrate of Jufeng [in Jiuzhen commandery] was greedy and oppressive and acted without restraint,Zhu Da and other men of the county joined forces with the local barbarians to make rebellion, and they attacked the magistrate and killed him.They gathered as many as four or five thousand men.
"Unless you change your mind, however, even the barbarianswill despise you, and how can I, sharer in the oath, continue to giveaid in your wars?
As a result, the Empress Fu herself became afraid. She wrote to her father Fu Wan, accusing Cao Cao of oppression and cruelty, and ordering him to make secret plans against him.
The Shaodang, Shaohe, Dangjian, Lejie and four other groups of the Qiang raided the border defences of Longxi and Jincheng.The Colonel Protector of the Qiang Duan Jiong attacked and defeated them.He pursued them as far as Luoting,and cut off the heads of more than two thousand chieftains, leaders and others, and captured over ten thousand of their people alive.
Dong Zhuo sent Niu Fu to take troops to camp at Shan. Niu Fu divided his army, and the colonels Li Jue of Beidi, Guo Si of Zhangye and Zhang Ji of Wuwei were given command of several ten thousand horse and foot to attack Zhu Jun at Zhongmou. They defeated him there, and went on to plunder the counties of Chenliu and Yingchuan. Wherever they passed they killed or took prisoners. Nothing was left.
If you act with virtue to follow the wishes of the empire, then even if you had no more than the ability of a common fellow, you would find no difficulty taking position as a hegemon.
Han Xian boasted of his achievements and acted without restraint.Dong Cheng disliked it. He sent a secret call to Cao Cao,
Li Shuasked help from Cao Cao but Cao Cao sent none.
Sun Quan went west to attack Huang Zu.21 He destroyed HuangZu's fleet, and only his fortress still held out. Then the hills banditsmade another rebellion and Sun Quan had to go back.
Sun Ce brought his army forward and Hua Xin received him ina headdress of fine cloth.
If our soldiers are worn out from fighting beyond their [262] bordersand the state has been left empty behind them, and if Sun Ce takesthat opportunity to attack, we shall not be able to manage alone.
Liu Zhang sent the General of the Household Pang Xi toattack him, but when he had no success Liu Zhang appointed him asAdministrator of Ba commandery, to camp at Langzhong andoppose Zhang Lu. Pang Xi, on his own authority, recruited the Zongpeople of Hanchang as soldiers.
Ifyou show no affection for your brother, why should the empire haveany good will towards either of you? "
Zhong Yao, a Gentleman in Attendance of the Yellow Gates, spoke to them and said, "At this time all the fighting men have risen up together, and each claims the mandate to rule on his own. Cao Cao of Yan province is the only one who cares for the imperial house. If you reject his loyalty this is no way to encourage people to look to you in the future."
In the autumn in the seventh month the imperial son Liu Ping wasmade King of Nanyang.
In the autumn in the seventh month Zhang Xiu was found guilty of failing to make prior request before he carried out the execution. He was summonsed and brought by cage cart to the Ministry of Justice,where he died.
Lü Bu camped southwest of Peicity, and sent one of his orderlies to invite Ji Ling and the others. JiLing and his fellows returned the invitation, and Lü Bu went tothem, and they drank and ate with Liu Bei.
The Gentleman of the Palace Xie Bi of Dong commandery sent in a sealed memorial as follows: "I have heard thatThe cobras and other serpents,Are the auspicious intimations of daughters.
Wang Fu, Cao Jie and their fellows were wicked extortionists and abused their power. From their position behind the scenes they influenced everything, both inside and out. The Grand Commandant Duan Jiong had a close association with them.
Within the city all supplies were gone, and there was no hope of relief from the outside.Knowing he could not escape, Zang Hong said to his military and civil officers, soldiers and people, "Yuan is a man without principle, and his ambitions are disloyal. Moreover, he gave no help to the leader of my commandery. For my own honour, I must die.
and as his men increased in number Wang Fu had them call out to their opponents, "Dou Wu is a rebel. You are men of the guard, and should protect the imperial palace. Why do you follow a rebel?
"Yuan Shu is arrogant and has no sense of planning," added Kuai Yue. "The leaders of private armies are often greedy and cruel and their followers are in distress. If you have someone show them the advantages in doing so, the masses will surely come to you.
The people of Jing and Chu, argued Sima Yi, "are fickle and easily swayed. Now that Guan Yu has been defeated, any troublemakers will have gone into hiding and will be reluctant to show themselves. So the only people you will be shifting are the ones who are loyal to you. They will become resentful, while those who have left will never be willing to return."
Cao Cao collected Yuan Shao's papers, including letters from menat Xu city and within his army. He burnt them all, saying, "WhenYuan Shao was strong, even I was not sure of myself. How muchmore is this true for my men."
Dou Wu sent in a letter, saying, "I have heard of no period of good government since the time that your majesty came to the throne. The Regular Attendants and the officials of the Yellow Gates conspire to deceive and mislead you, and appointments are given irresponsibly to quite unworthy people. "
The Administrator of Danyang, Zhou Xin of Kuaiji, was on bad terms with Yuan Shu, and Yuan Shu recommended Sun Ce's maternal uncle Wu Jing in his stead. Wu Jing attacked Zhou Xin and seized the commandery, and he appointed Sun Ce's elder cousin Sun Ben as Commandant of Danyang.
In the summer, in the fourth month Wuchendi and others, the Wuhuan of Dai and Shanggu commanderies, made rebellion.
"In former times [the ruler of] Qin trusted in Zhao Gao, and so brought his state into danger. And [the ruler of] Wu brought misfortune upon himself by making use of a eunuch.
Cao Cao chased them but failed tocatch them. He collected their baggage, maps and books, and theirtreasure.
Guan Yu also sent detachments to besiege the General Lü Chang at Xiangyang.
The emperor was extremely angry, and Liu You, with Li Ying and Feng Gun, were all sent to convict labour in the Enclosure of the Left.
Then Cao Jie and his fellows wanted to have the dowager buried in a separate tomb [to that of her husband Emperor Huan], while the position of the equal [consort's] tablet in the ancestral temple was allocated to that of the Honoured Lady Feng.
He observed, however, "For times ofpeace, Liu Biao the ability to rank with the Three Excellencies, buthe does not appreciate how things have changed. He leaves manymatters uncertain and makes few decisions. He will not achieveanything."
Before this, Zhongchang Tong of Shanyang had come as a refugee scholar to Bing province and attended Gao Gan. Gao Gan received him extremely well, and asked him about the affairs of the day.
The court[i.e. Cao Cao, on the other hand] gave Shi Xie a sealed commissionas General of the Household Who Comforts the South, to govern theseven commanderies while still holding position as Administrator ofJiaozhi.
Dong Zhao said to Cao Cao, "Since ancient times, of all greatministers who have saved the empire, never has there been [439]achievement to compare with yours today; and no man of the past,with such great work as this, has consented so long to serveanother.
The Excellency over the Masses Hu Guang was made Grand Tutor with control of the Secretariat.The Excellency of Works Liu Chong became Excellency over the Masses and the Minister Herald Xu Xu became Excellency of Works.
Song Yi would not agree, however, and Wang Hong could not act alone, so they both obeyed the summons.
so Qian Zhao went east to Cao Cao, andCao Cao re-appointed him as an Assistant Officer of Ji province.
Du Xi went to protest, but Cao Cao interrupted him, "My plans are set. Don't say anything more."
Guan Yu attacked Fan city hard. Affected by the water, the fortifications slowly crumbled and fell. All the army was nervous and afraid,
Pang Xi sent Cheng Qi a second time to argue with his father,but Cheng Ji said, "I have received favour from the Governor [LiuZhang], and shall always be loyal to him. You are an officer in thecommandery, and must certainly do all you can for your Admini strator.
Jiang Gong, however, lay in bed in the dark with the covers over his face.He explained that he had a dizzy sickness, so bad he could not come out.The artist was not able to see him.
Lü Meng heard that Cao Cao intended to bring soldiers to the east,and he urged Sun Quan to establish a fortress near the mouth of theRuxu River.
The question of food is by far the most importThose who discuss this question talk a great deal about the advantages of some coinage policy, but they fail to deal with the basic problems of agriculture.
In the spring, in the first month, King Cao of WEI brought his army to Juchao. Sun Quan guarded Ruxu. In the second month, Cao Cao went forward and attacked him.
If the General does not accept some reduction in his authority, he may not escape even with his life."
In the spring, in the first month, Cao Cao returned to Xu city.
Kebineng, chieftain of the Xianbi, had come with several ten thousand cavalry to watch events. He saw Cao Zhang's might in battle, and how those who faced him were all destroyed. He asked to submit, and so all the north was pacified.
In the time of Emperor Wu the commanderies presented Filial and Incorrupt candidates, and there were also selections of Worthy and Good and of Literary Scholars. In this manner, celebrated ministers appeared in serried ranks, and the state flourished in both the civil and the military arts.
Frightened, they all shouted, "They're here."Holding a halberd, Dian Wei stood up and roared defiance. Wherever he struck, none could withstand the blow. Lu Bu's forces retreated.
When an official wastransferred or summoned to the capital, it was first required that he should go to Liang Ji's gateway, to inscribe his name as a means of showing gratitude for the favour, and only then would he venture to attend the Imperial Secretariat [to receive a formal document of commission].
He wept and said, "When my late father came from Changsha to attack Dong Zhuo, he joined you at Nanyang, made alliance with you and became your friend. Through ill fortune he met with death, and his good work remained unfinished.
Yuan Shao flew into a rage, "Are you the only strong man in the empire?"
Altogether, Duan Jiong had fought one hundred and eighty engagements, had killed thirty-eight thousand of the enemy, and captured 427,000 head of various domestic and herding animals.The expenses of the campaign were over 4,400 million cash,and rather more than four hundred of the men in his army had died. Duan Jiong's enfeoffment was changed to Marquis of Xinfeng county, with an estate of ten thousand households.
The Minister of the Imperial Household Liu Kuan became Grand Commandant.
Furthermore, you have just destroyed an innocent lord [Liu Yu] and you are hostile to an honest subject [myself, Tian Chou]. I regret to say that the men of Yan and Zhao would prefer to leap into the Eastern Sea and drown themselves, rather than follow you.
Gongsun Du appointed himself Marquis of Liaodong and Governor of Ping province.55 He set up temples to the two Han ancestors [Emperor Gao and Emperor Guangwu], he took the authority to hold state sacrifice to Heaven and Earth and to Plough the Sacred Field, he rode in a Phoenix Carriage with a team of four horses, and he established Cavalry of the Feathered [Forest] with [Standard-Bearers of] Ox-tail Banners.
About this time Huang Zu died. Liu Qi asked to take his post, so Liu Biao appointed him Administrator of Jiangxia.
When Cao Cao returned, he made a list and asked for the names of all those who had given warnings before he began the campaign. No-one knew the reason, and everybody was afraid,
The clanleaders, however, heard about it before his troops reached Haihun.They left their positions and fled, and Liu Xun gained nothing.
Li Ying and the others had also implicated many relatives and clients of the eunuchs [in their confessions]. The eunuchs were alarmed at this, and suggested to the emperor that the time was ripe for an amnesty
The eunuchs instructed Lao Xiu, a disciple of Zhang Cheng, to send in a letter saying that, "Li Ying and others have been protecting the vagabond students of the University, they have a network of contacts throughout the provinces, and they have formed a faction. They slander and abuse the court, and they cause doubt and confusion among the customs [of the people]."
A cavalryman of Sun Ce who was guilty of some fault ran away to Yuan Shu's camp and hid in the headquarters stables.
By this time, every ruler of a province or commandery east of the passes was attempting to take someone else's territory in order to make himself more powerful. Yuan Shao and Yuan Shu were also at odds.
The emperor appointed the Intendant of Jingzhao Chen Gui as General Who Crosses the Liao.
Zhang Chao was at Yongqiu and Cao Cao besieged him closely.Zhang Chao said, "If only Zang Hong would come to help us!"
Jia Kui said to hisguards, "Is there no brave man here, to let a good fellow die like this?"
and he fled north with his officers to Juyong."Gongsun Zan pursued and attacked him, and after three days the city fell. He captured Liu Yu and his wife and children and brought them back to Ji, still keeping him in nominal charge of the civil administration of the province.
The first priority is to gather your troops and establish firm defences.
As for the people, who needs to consult them? If any prove reluctant, I shall set my soldiers onto them, and I could make them go all the way to the sea!"
Fan Zhou, Assistant Officer in Wuling, allied with the nonChinese people and planned to take the commandery for the King of Hanzhong, Liu Bei
Liu Bei was at Jiameng.31 Pang Tong said to him, "Now, quietlycollect your best soldiers, then march day and night to surpriseChengdu. Liu Zhang is not a fighting man, and he has made nopreparations. If a large army comes up swiftly the affair can besettled with a single blow. This is the best plan.
One of Yuan Shao's sentries intercepted the message, and at asuitable time Yuan Shao's army lit the fire.
On the day gengzi [19 Jul] Yang Feng and Han Xian escorted the emperor back to the east. Zhang Yang brought supplies for the journey.
If rewardsprovide no incentive, it is called 'restraining the good'; if punish ments have no effect, it is called 'setting loose evil'.
Then Liu Bei took over as Governor of Yi province. He appointed Zhuge Liang, hitherto General of the Household Master of the Army, as General Master of the Army.The Administrator of Yizhou, Dong He of Nan commandery, became General of the Household Manager of the Army, and shared responsibility for the office of the General of the Left.The Lieutenant-General Ma Chao became General Who Paci fies the West, and the Colonel Consultant of the Army Fa Zheng became Administrator of Shu commandery and General Who Manifests Firmness.The Major-General Huang Zhong of Nanyang became General Who Extenninates Caitiffs, and the Gentleman of the General Staff Mi Zhu became General Who Gives Tranquillity to Han.Jian Yong became General Who Shines in Virtue, Sun Qian of Beihai became General Who Supports Loyalty, and Huang Quan, magistrate of Guanghan, became a Lieutenant-General. Xu Ort Jing of Runan became Chief Clerk to the General of the Left. Pang Xi became a Major, Li Yan became Administrator of Jianwei and Fei Guan Administrator of Ba commandery.Yi Ji of Shanyang became a Gentleman of the General Staffs Liu Ba ofLingling was appointed Senior Clerk in the Department of the West and Peng Yang of Guanghan was made Headquarters Officer for Yi province.
All the soldiers, however, manned thewalls. They sent out the summons for assistance, they were preparedand watchful, their shouts shook the ground and they shot severalarrows at the men outside.
"In the end, however, it is only by extraordinary acts that onecan build exceptional achievement. It is for you to decide the bestpolicy."
Sun Ce tried several times to force a bridgehead over the river,but without success.
Zhang Xiu paid no attention but sent his menforward, and they were thoroughly beaten.
This surelymeans that he is undecided and has no heart for the fight.
In the spring, in the first month on the day bingshen [26 Jan] there was an amnesty for the empire.An edict was issued seeking the heirs of Li Gu.
If you are ever going to use the people of Wu and Yue against the power of central China, then the sooner the better. If you cannot manage it, then why have you not restrained your troops, curbed your armed men, and faced north to serve Cao Cao?
A gentlemanshows love for others by virtuous advice, so I must speak out now.19We should not act like this."
He turned to his sons and said, "Should I wish you to act wrongly, [you are good enough to know] not to do so. If I cause you to act well, then [you must know that] I have never done anything wrong."
The Administrator of Liaoxi, Zhao Bao, was a man from Ganling. When he came to his office he sent messengers calling his mother, his wife and children to join him. Just as they were passing through Liucheng, ten thousand Xianbi broke through the frontier to raid and plunder. Zhao Bao's mother, wife and children were taken prisoner. Then the enemy went forward with these hostages to attack the commandery capital [at Yangle] and Zhao Bao led twenty thousand horsemen to face them in battle array.
As a result of this incident, all the officials of the Yellow Gates and the Regular Attendants were cowed and quiet, and dared not go out of the palace precincts except on official business.
I intend to follow the examples of Yi Yin and Huo Guang, and set [Liu Xie] the King of Chenliu upon the imperial throne. What is your opinion?"
In the spring, in the first month on the day dingchou [?xinchou=12 Feb]1there was an amnesty for the empire.
King Cao of WEI planned to move south from Luoyang to assist Cao Ren. All his officers urged that "Unless the King goes quickly, they will be defeated."
As the situation becomes more critical every day, our minds will not be easy unless General Zhang takes command."
Lii Meng received the letter, but kept it secret. That night he called his officers and told them his plans: at dawn he would attack Lingling. Then he turned to a former client of He Pu, Deng Xuanzhi from Nanyang, and said to him, "He Zitai has heard tales of loyalty and honour, and is hoping to emulate them. He does not appreci ate, however, the situation he is dealing with.
Li Jue and Guo Si camped by the Lateral Gates of the Southern Palace. They killed the Minister Coachman Lu Kui, the Minister Herald Zhou Huan, the Colonel of the City Gates Cui Lie and the Colonel of Elite Cavalry Wang Qi.
Cao Cao fully approved his conduct. He sent messengers to grant a Staff of Authority to Zhang He, and he confirmed Guo Huai as Major.
The Excellency over the Masses Qiao Xuan left office. The Minister of Ceremonies Zong Ju of Nanyang was made Excellency over theMasses, and the former Excellency of Works Xu Xu became Excellency over the Masses.
Yuan Wei then removed the emperor's seal and ribbon and presented them to the King of Chenliu, and he escorted the new king down to the body of the hall, where he faced north to acknowledge himself as subject.
Hitherto, Yuan Shu had believed that he controlled the forces south of the Huai, while Sun Ce [south of the Yangzi] was certain to support him. When he got this letter he was sad and downcast and became ill.
"The best policy is to keep him at a distance and make himwait. You hold the strong places of the hills and rivers and youcommand the troops of four provinces. Keep contact with leadersoutside and encourage farming in your own lands.
When Cao Cao was young he was clever and ingenious and could adapt himself to any situation, but he sometimes took the law into his own hands, and he was casual or frivolous, paying little attention to his duties.
In the winter, in the eleventh month Zhang Xiu brought histroops to submit to Cao Cao.
The men east of the passes who have raised loyal troops are all our supporters.
The Protector of the Wuhuan Xia Yu sent in a proposal: "The Xianbi have raided our borders more than thirty times since spring. I ask permission to raise troops from all the commanderies in You province and to go outside the frontier to attack them. In the period of one winter and two springs I shall certainly be able to destroy them."
In the winter, in the tenth month the emperor engaged in a competitive hunt at Guangcheng, and then proceeded to visit the Shanglin Park.
I have heard it said that the attendants of an emperor are the sources of the virtues of his government.
In the winter, in the tenth month there was an earthquake in Jingprovince.
In the summer, in the fifth month Cao Cao withdrew all his forces from Hanzhong and returned to Chang'an. So Liu Bei held Hanzhong.
He also sent Lü Bu to break open the tombs of the emperors and the burial mounds of the excellencies and other officials, high and low, and collect their treasure.
Before this, Zhang Wen had raised three thousand shock cavalry from among the Wuhuan of You province to use them in Liang province. The former Chancellor of Zhongshan, Zhang Chun of Yuyang, asked to be given the command, but Zhang Wen turned him down and appointed the magistrate of Zhuo, Gongsun Zan of Liaoxi.
When the provinces and commanderies gathered their forces to attack Dong Zhuo, Wang Rui and Sun Jian also raised troops.
Xiahou Yuan also sent a detachment under Zhang He across the Yellow River into Xiaohuangzhong, and the Qiang tribesmen west of the River all surrendered. The lands west of Long Mountain were pacified.
In the eighth month the Excellency of Works Zhang Wen was madeGeneral of Chariots and Cavalry, with the Bearer of the Gilded Mace Yuan Pang as his assistant, and was sent against Beigong Boyu. The General of the Household [of the East] Dong Zhuo was made General Who Routs the Caitiffs and was ordered, with Zhou Shen the General Who Terrifies Criminals, to act under Zhang Wen's command.
Take advantage of the north erners' preoccupations, attack Huang Zu and drive him away, goforward against Liu Biao, then seize the full length of the LongRiver [the Yangzi]. Here is the task for a king."
Before this, the General of the Van Ma Teng and the General Who Maintains the West in Peace Han Sui had been sworn brothers, but later there were quarrels between their private retainers and they became enemies.
If you give aid to the Son of Heaven above, then you playthe part of Duke Huan and Duke Wen. For next best you couldemulate Dou Rong, and you will never lack for wealth or honour.
Xun Yu spoke to Cao Cao, and all the silk was returned to thepeople. Everyone was pleased and there was peace in the commandery.
An imperial edict appointed Jin Shang of Jingzhao as Inspector of Yan province. Before he could enter the territory, however, Cao Caocame to attack, and Jin Shang took refuge with Yuan Shu.
When Cao Cao took the royal title, Yang Xun published a eulogy of his achievements and virtue.
But Du Shang followed them, penetrating several hundred li, destroying three of their encampments and capturing great quantities of treasure.
Once we run away, we shall have lost everything south of the Great River. You must stay here."
Fighting for their lives, his men quickly defeated the enemy.They took the heads of Chunyu Qiong and others, burnt the suppliesand killed more than a thousand soldiers. They cut the noses from the men, and the lips and tongues from the cattle and the horses, anddisplayed them before Yuan Shao's army. Yuan Shao's men were now anxious and afraid.
All along the route he had followed, scores of people were executed [for having given him shelter], and throughout the empire anyone who had any involvement with him was arrested and tortured. Members of his family and clan were slaughtered, and the [houses in] many of the commanderies and counties were ruined.
A little while later they climbed a tower. Liu Qi ordered that the ladder be taken away, then said to Zhuge Liang, "Here we are not high enough to touch Heaven, nor low enough to reach the ground. Any words you utter will reach my ears alone. Can you not say something?"
On a later occasion, Cao Cao dismissed all his other attendants and asked Jia Xu about the succession. Jia Xu remained silent and made no reply.
He found Xu Xuan guilty, sentenced him to public execution and had his corpse displayed afterwards.
It takes a worthy man to recognise another, observed Du Xi, "and only a sage can appreciate a sage. How can a common fellowacknowledge his true superior?
At this time, of Liu Yan's sons, Fan, was General of the Household on the Left, Dan was an Imperial Clerk Preparer of Documents,68 and Zhang was Colonel Who Serves the Army. All three had accompanied the emperor to Chang'an, but his youngest son, the Senior Major Liu Mao, remained with Liu Yan. The emperor sent Liu Zhang with a message to admonish Liu Yan and re-establish contact, but Liu Yan kept him and did not send him back.
Wang Yun helped the emperor to climb the tower of the Xuanping Gate to escape the enemy. Li Jue and his fellows came to the gate, fell to the ground and made the kowtow. The emperor said to them, "Gentlemen, you have set soldiers loose every-where, what do you want?"
The Grand Commandant Yang Ci, who was at this time still Excellency over the Masses, sent in a memorial to say: "Zhang Jue is deceiving and exploiting the common people. When amnesties are granted, instead of repenting, he spreads his evil influence even wider.
You should take the heads of your ten Regular Attendants, hang them along the southern walls of the city as a sign of apology to the empire, and send messengers to proclaim the news throughout the country. There would be no further need for an army."
"During the Yongchu period (107-113), when the Qiang barbarians invaded the region of the Han and all the commanderies and counties were destroyed, the Banshun people came to help us. The Qiang were killed or driven away, and they spoke of the Banshun soldiers as 'devil troops'. They told their fellow-tribesmen, and warned them never to go south again.
You are the man that will restore the peace."
The Supervisor of the Secretariat Mao Jie said, "Some while ago, Yuan Shao made no distinction between the sons of the legal wife and of the concubine. He overturned his clan and destroyed his state. To set aside the heir is a matter of great moment.
and Yuan Shao's army came straight to the gates [of Yi fortress]. Gongsun Zan sent his son Gongsun Xu to ask help from theleaders of the Black Mountain bandit groups. He planned to leadfast cavalry out west towards the hills, then join the Black [246] Mountain forces in an attack on Ji province across Yuan Shao'srear.
In the ninth month on the day gengwu [26 Nov], first of the month,there was an eclipse of the sun.
In the spring, in the first month on the day jiazi [6 Mar] the Honoured Lady Cao [Jie] was established as Empress. She was the daughter of Duke Cao of WEI.
The Senior Major Lü Meng of Runanhad his squadron looking fresh and drilled, and his men were well trained. Sun Quan was impressed. He increased his command,promoted him and showed him favour.
"Bian Zhang and Han Sui, men of Jincheng, were well-known in the western provinces, and the rebels forced them to join their army and gave them positions among the leaders with particular responsibility for military affairs. Chen Yi the Administrator of Jincheng was killed, and the commandery and provincial headquarters were attacked and burned."
And this is like men sailing in the same boat: if one thing goes wrong we shall all of us drown.
You should decline these great prizes and so keep your personal reputation intact."
In just the same way as one vessel should not contain charcoal and ice, so wicked men and virtuous men should not take part in government together.
Gongsun Zan led twenty thousand footsoldiers and horsemen to intercept them. Catching them south of Dongguang, he completely defeated them and cut off more than thirty thousand heads.
When Xun Yu and Kong Rong first heard that Man Chong hadexamined Yang Biao with flogging, they were angry. When thisbrought about the release, however, they became even more friendlytowards him.
And he said to the other Regular Attendants, "From now on we must stay within the palace and not go out to our private estates."
Kong Rong had relied upon his well-known ability, frequently making fun of Cao Cao or abusing him. He enjoyed saying unusual things and he was insubordinate and discourteous.
They went forward to meet Cao Cao at the Red Cliffs.
If you made Qi into soup, I would still drink it."
Chen Rong turned and said, "There are unwritten rules of humanity and honour. If you follow them, you are a gentleman. If you ignore them, you are a common fellow.
Yuan Shu sent an invitation to Zhang Fan, a celebrated scholar who had never held office. Zhang Fan would not go, but he sent his younger brother Zhang Cheng to present his thanks.
In the eleventh month the Grand Commandant Liu Ju left office. The Minister Herald Wenren Xi of Pei kingdom became Grand Commandant.
I am sorry you did not come earlier, for not one of my ministers has said this to me before."
Now the new officials of the terrace and doors, the Masters of Writing Zhu Yu, Xun Kun, Liu You, Wei Lang, Liu Ju and Yin Xun are all worthy men of the state and good servants of the court, while the Gentlemen of the Masters of Writing Zhang Ling, Gui Hao, Yuan Kang, Yang Qiao, Bian Shao and Dai Hui are all men of the finest literary culture, with clear understanding of the laws.11 There is a host of talented men suitable for appointment to positions either inside the capital or outside.
Yuan Xi was attacked by his officers Jiao Chu and Zhang Nan, andhe fled with Yuan Shang to the Wuhuan in Liaoxi.
Pang Xi was frightened. He sent his officer Cheng Qi to go tohis father Cheng Ji the magistrate of Hanchang, with orders to sendtroops recruited from the Zong people.
In the end he achieved the great design, and surely he deserved it.
Zhang Ji had frequently quarrelled with Yang Feng and Dong Cheng, and he now allied himself once more with Li Jue and Guo Si.
"Some of these people may present an item of fu rhapsody, and others fill bamboo strips with bird seal calligraphy. By this means they are admitted to the ranks of the Gentlemen [152] of the Palace, while their images are set up in red and black.
Then Kong Rong sent in a memorial that, "The emperor should follow the regulations for royal domains established by the ancient kings. No feudal lord should be enfeoffed within a thousand li of the imperial capital."
"Your Excellency is modest, you are reluctant to make amistake you might regret, and you are glad to maintain your honourand loyalty.
When Liu Yu saw Zhang Qi and his colleagues, he rebuked them sternly, "The empire has fallen into disorder, and the ruler is driven into exile. I have received great favours from the throne, but I have not yet been able to clear away the disgrace from our state.
If you share it with the common people, it will be no harm to the government."
One by one they asked permission to resign, and sent messages to recall their relatives and fellow-clansmen who held office in the provinces and commanderies.
Your men are concerned about it. A ruler who is notserious will have no authority.
About this time, on advice of the Grand Commandant Zhou Zhong and the Master of Writing Jia Xu, Li Jue summoned Zhu Jun to court. Zhu Jun declined Tao Qian and instead answered the call. He was again made Minister Coachman.
Cao Cao followed this advice, and Han[326] Fan and Liang Qi were both granted enfeoffment as secondarymarquises.
In the summer, in the fifth month on the day jiaxu [2 Jul], there was a landslide in Hanzhong commandery.
In the autumn, in the seventh month on the day jiayin [8 Aug] the "Thoughtful" Empress of Emperor Huan was buried at Xuanling.
He said to the messengers, "I regret that I cannot match the performances of Yi Yin of Shang nor Lu Shang of Zhou; it seems my lot resembles the three virtuous men of Yin.
"Now you are chief commander, with all the favour and honour of the state. Guo Si holds the chief ministers, but you have taken the emperor: which is more serious?
After a short time they reported again, "Horsemengradually increasing; too many foot-soldiers to count."
uan Shaowould not agree, saying, "The main thing is to take Cao Cao first."
The Regular Attendant Guo Sheng came from the same commandery as He Jin.He had been involved in the fortune and favour of the Dowager and He Jin, and was a close and loyal friend of the He clan. He joined the discussions with Zhao Zhong and the others, but they decided not to join Jian Shi's plot and Guo Sheng showed the letter to He Jin.
The prosperity of the army and the state began with Zao Zhiand was accomplished by Ren Jun.
It is best to present a full report, and let the court decide."
Yuan Shao hung his insignia of office on the Upper East Gate and escaped to Ji province.
Cui Yan and Mao Jie brought forward the honest and the true and dismissed the flowery and the false; they advanced the quiet and the humble; they repressed the flatterers and politicians.
"When wicked ministers oppress the state, and the time for their punishment is come", said the emperor, "how can there be any doubts?"
Sun Quan also gave Liu Zhang appointment as Governor of Yi province, with temporary residence at Zigui.Soon afterwards Liu Zhang died.
the Annals of Emperor Xian.Chuping 4: 193 AD 19 February 193 - 8 February 194
The Heir flung his arms around the neck of the Consultant Xin Pi and said: "Can you imagine, Mr Xin, how happy I am?"
Yang Qiu went to the gate of the palace to offer thanks for the favour [of his new appointment], then presented memorials on the crimes and wrongdoing of Wang Fu and Duan Jiong, together with the Regular Attendants Chunyu Deng, Yuan She, Feng Ta and others.On the day xinsi [31 May] Wang Fu, Duan Jiong and the others were all arrested and sent to the Luoyang Prison, together with Wang Fu's sons the Steward of the Palace of Prolonged Joy Wang Meng and the Chancellor of Pei Wang Ji.
Lü Bu's officer Hou Cheng had lost his best horse but then found itagain. His fellow-officers gave a party to congratulate him.12 Theyshared out wine and meat, and Hou Cheng went to offer a first shareto Lü Bu.
An edict abolished the three reign-titles Guangxi, Zhaoning and Yong-Han [so the year was once more identified as the sixth of Zhongping].
In the third month on the day xinchou [26 Apr] there was an amnesty for the empire and the reign title was changed [to Guanghe].
He also attacked Liu Shi, Green Ox-Horn, Yellow Dragon, Enclosure on the Left, Great-Virtue Guo, Big-Eyes Li and Yu Digen, killing tens of thousands more and destroying their camps and defences.
Sun Quan came forward and wiped his tears for him, saying, "I am grateful and ashamed. Caution is now engraved on my heart, not just written on a girdle."
Again the emperor sent his highest ministers to make peace between Li Jue and Guo Si, but Guo Si detained Yang Biao, the Excellency of Works Zhang Xi, the Master of Writing Wang Long, the Minister of the Household Deng Yuan [miswritten as Liu Yuan], the Minister of the Guards Shisun Rui, the Minister Coachman Han Rong, the Minister of Justice Xuan Fan, the Minister Herald Rong Ge, the Minister of Finance Zhu Jun, the Court Architect Liang Shao, and the Colonel of Garrison Cavalry Jiang Xuan, and held them in his camp as hostages.
But if we are like father and son? asked Lü Bu.
Guo Jia then said, "Yuan Shao will go north to attack GongsunZan. You can take advantage of his absence and go east to deal withLü Bu.
Then Sun Quan got up to go to the lavatory, and Lu Su followed him under the eaves.
Having repaired the imperial tombs, Sun Jian led his army back to Luyang.
so no food arrived and everyone was hungry and in want. Gentlemen of the Masters of Writing and lower officials went out in person to gather wild grain. Some died of starvation among the walls; others were killed by the soldiers.
Sun Quan appointed Lu Xun as Protector of the Army of the Right and General Who Maintains the West in Peace. He was raised in fief to be Marquis of Lou. He camped at Yiling to guard the mouth of the Gorges.
Duan Wei maintained provisions for the emperor and supplies for the officials, never wavering in his loyalty.
The bandit Dong Zhuo has taken advantage of a temporary confusion and compelled the officials to obey him, so this is a moment of difficulty for the house of Han.
"To destroy houses and trees is an action which is harsh and cruel. Even though it is your wish to give warning against wrongdoing, it will not be easy to make a lasting reputation by such means.
It is inappropriate that I should even hear of such a plan."
Some thousand of the remaining bandits wanted to surrender.Those in council said, "The Duke has established a custom: there isno pardon granted to enemies who surrender only after they havebeen surrounded."
being Chapter 55 of the Chronicle of Han
It would be much better to pardon him and give him appointment as administrator in some commandery. Yuan Shao will be glad to escape punishment and will certainly cause no trouble."
Many of the people, however, loved their homeland and refused to leave, so Xun Yu alone led his family and clan away to join Han Fu.
On the day bingwu [5 May] Sun Ce died. He was then agedtwenty-six.
Now the rebels are in JiaXin's hands, and I, your aged servant, request that you take noaction in this.
The man who worked theboat was killed by a stray arrow, but with his left hand Xu Chu helda horse's saddle to protect Cao Cao and with his right he managedthe boat.
Yuan Shao could not appreciate such great matters, and he only ran away because he was frightened.
Liu Tao, Senior Clerk under the Excellency over the Masses, then sent in another memorial.Repeating Yang Ci's suggestions, he added that, "Zhang Jue's secret plans are increasingly threatening. The empire is full of whispers and rumours, and it is claimed that Zhang Jue and his followers have gained entry to the capital and have spies within the court.
In the summer, in the fourth month on the day xinhai [25 May] there was a fire in the Eastern Office of Kangling.
"Moreover, there are great numbers of concubines in the palace, consuming food with no work to justify themselves. They are bad for [normal] life and they waste the resources of the state.
In the autumn, in the seventh month Cao Cao brought his fleet fromthe Guo to the Huai. Following the Fei River down to Hefei, heestablished military colonies at Quebei.
Before this, because he was a former subordinate of Liang Ji, Zhang Huan had been dismissed from office and proscribed.Among all his friends and comrades from earlier times, only Huangfu Gui had dared to speak on his behalf.He sent in appeals for him, seven times in all, and it was on his account that Zhang Huan became Administrator of Wuwei.
Lü Bu is brave andfierce, and he has now allied himself once more with Yuan Shu. Ifhe is allowed to operate at will between the Huai and Si rivers thelocal fighting men will certainly join him.
Helian's son Qianman was still a child, so Helian's nephew Kuitou took the throne.
Wealthy men paid their money first, but those who were poor could take up their appointments and pay double price later.
Cao Cao had sent Xiahou Yuan and Zhang Liao to besiege ChangXi [at Tan city] in Donghai. After several months their supplieswere exhausted, and they were considering whether they shouldwithdraw their troops.
Lü Bu renewed the alliance with Yuan Shu and. sent his General ofthe Household Gao Shun and the Administrator of Beidi, ZhangLiao of Yanmen, to attack Liu Bei.
Before this, King Cao of WEI had called in Pei Qian, Administrator of Dai commandery, to be Senior Clerk in the Department of Justice under the Chancellor.Cao Cao praised his government of Dai commandery,but Pei Qian replied, "I acted generously to the people, but I was firm with the barbarians.
He destroyed both of them.
In ancient times, when the Xiang family opposed the Qin dynasty, the people had no recognised ruler, so it was necessary to offer rewards in order to encourage new recruits.
Now you say the emperor 'has no blood relationship,' but that is simple slander. You say, 'the people of our clan have been slaughtered,' and 'how can you still accept this ruler?' But this was Dong Zhuo's work, certainly not the emperor's.
Cao Cao was camped at Dunqiu when Poison Yu and other bandits attacked Dongwuyang.
In the summer, in the fourth month the Yellow River ran clear in Jiyin, Dong commandery, Jibei and Pingyuan.
When the late Emperor was angry with the Dowager and she was on the brink of destruction, it was we who wept and managed to save her, and each of us gave thousands and tens of thousands from our private fortunes to make the emperor contented again.49 All we sought was the patronage of your house.
Bu Yang and Pan Hong, long-established bandits of Guiyang, fled into deep mountain country.
Then Dou Wu made further accusations, calling for the execution of Cao Jie and his associates. The Dowager hesitated, for she was too soft-hearted to bear with the consequences of such action. And so the matter dragged on without any decision.
When all those who contest him in wisdom are exhausted, and when all those who compete with him by force have been defeated, then they come to a situation where they can no longer resist him and their strength can no longer match his. Then at last they bow their heads and bend their necks and accept his yoke.
Ithas reached a point where your officials must dirty their clothes andhide their carriages and fine robes,
Zhang Huan is embarrassed by this, so he harbours suspicion and hatred. He accepts the complaints of the rebellious Qiang, and hecontrives sophistries. He says that my men have suffered several set backs,and he also says that since the Qiang are born from one of the elemental powers it is impossible to destroy them completely,that the mountains and valleys are broad and high and cannot be fully cleared, that blood is flowing across the wilderness, and that an injured peace will bring disaster."
"Gongjin[Zhou Yu] is the same age in years as Bofu [Sun Ce], and only one month younger.
Then the emperor gave orders that Huangfu Gui should return [to the capital].He appointed him a Consultant, and considered whether his achievements might be worthy of enfeoffment.The Regular Attendants Xu Huang and Zuo Guan hoped to gain profit from the affair, and on several occasions they sent clients and retainers to ask further details about his good work.Huangfu Gui, however, refused to respond to them.
Emperor Guangwu encountered a time of decline in the middle of Han, with bold men bubbling up like boiling gruel. He rose from amongst the common people, but he restored the greatness of the past. He waged war in every direction, and he had no free time on any day, but he still appreciated the learning of the classics. He invited scholars as his guests, he opened schools everywhere, he revived the Rites and Music and made them clear.
"A people who have shown themselves so loyal to us and so valuable would not rebel without good cause.
Dong Zhuo offered rewards and tried eagerly to capture Yuan Shao. Zhou Bi and Wu Qiong argued with him, "To dismiss one emperor and set up another, these are matters of moment, quite beyond the understanding of ordinary men.
They twitter like birds, they have the hearts of wild beasts, and they make plots together.
Ren Lan of Rongyang was a close friend of Wei Feng,
Then Wei Huan sighed and said, "So you are asking that I go alive [to the court] and come back dead [because I would be compelled to speak out against abuses and would inevitably be killed for making such criticisms]. What is thepoint?"
King Bogu of Gaogouli raided Liaodong. Geng Lin, Administrator of Xuantu, attacked him and compelled him to surrender.
Now you take advantage of your power, and you possess all the province. This is the first time you have governed this state, and you have yet to show any favour or kindness."Right dealings between host and guest, moreover, require the visitor to give way. I ask that you reduce punishments and ease the restrictions. That way you would soothe the people."
Liu Zhang then returned to Chengdu and Liu Bei went north toJiameng. Before he departed for the campaign against Zhang Lu,however, he acted with generosity and grace to win the hearts of thepeople.
Liu Bei was frightened every time he went in to see her.
and the emperor became a little less angry.He sent the Regular Attendant Wang Fu to go to the jail and make further enquiry of Fan Pang and the other men of faction. All of them were exposed [in the courtyard] below the steps in wooden stocks which held head, hands and feet, and with their heads covered over.Wang Fu questioned them one by one, saying, "Each of you supports the other, just like lips and teeth. What does this mean?"
Zhang Xiu led cavalry in pursuit, but Cao Cao attacked anddefeated him. Zhang Xiu returned to Rang and again took servicewith Liu Biao.
On this day [xinwei, 25 Sep] the emperor returned to the palace. There was an amnesty for the empire and the reign-title Guangxi was renamed Zhaoning.
Even if you could transform gravel and sand into metals from the south,or change tiles and stones into pieces of jade like that of Bian He,the common people would still be thirsty because they would have nothing to drink, and they would still be hungry because they would have nothing to eat.In a situation like this, even if the ruler possessed the perfect virtue of the Heavenly Emperor and Fuxi,or the cultivated understanding of Tang and Yu,he would not be able to protect even what he held within the walls of the palace.
When he held the victory feast for his officers, Gan Ning came before his mat and kowtowed. His blood and tears flowed together, and he said to Sun Quan, "Su Fei showed me favour in the past. Had it not been for him I would now be neglected bones in a ditch, and I could never have come under your standard.
?.
In former times Xiao [He] and Cao [Can] were boyhood friends of Gaozu, while Chen [Ping] and Han [Xin] came later as refugees. When ranking was discussed, Han Xin held the highest place, but I have not heard that either Xiao He or Cao Can were angry about it.
In the third month King Cao of WEI came through the Yegu Pass from Chang'an and set his army to cover the important points on the approaches to Hanzhong."
They were all very grateful, and asked what they could do in return. ,
He [272]went on to storm Xiapi and captured Guan Yu. He attacked ChangXi and defeated him.
Cao Cao brought his army forward to Jiangling. He appointed Liu Zong Inspector of Qing province with fief as a full marquis, and he also enfeoffed Kuai Yue and fourteen other men as marquises.
Han Xian and Yang Feng were in Xiapi and plundered across Xuand Yang provinces. Their army was short of supplies, so theyasked leave to go into Jing province. Lü Bu refused.
Only Guo Tai had the insight and understanding to preserve his own life, while Shentu Pan realised what would happen and took appropriate action, not waiting till the final day.This is exceptional wisdom!
Cao Cao wanted to send twothousand soldiers to reinforce him, but Cheng Yu refused, "With hisarmy of a hundred thousand, Yuan Shao is confident that nothingcan stand before him.
The emperor showed Zhang Jun's memorial to his attendants, and they all took off their caps and came barefoot to bow before him. They asked to be sent to the Imperial Prison in Luoyang, and they offered all their property for the use of the army.
As he moved to attack Sun Quan, Cao Cao sent a memorial tothe court that Xun Yu should come down to encourage the army atQiao.
In the fifth month the Grand Commandant Chen Dan left office. TheExcellency of Works Xu Xun became Grand Commandant.
Jian Shi hated the General-in-Chief He Jin, and with all the Regular Attendants he urged the emperor to send He Jin west to attack Han Sui. The emperor agreed.
So he marched, sending Zhang He as advance guard with five thousand horse and foot.
So Zhang Liao returned to the fight, charged the ring and brought out the rest of his company.All Sun Quan's men and horses were scattered and none dared face Zhang Liao.
Liu Dai was on bad terms with Qiao Mao, so he killed him and named Wang Gong as Administrator of Dong commandery.
Yuan Shang led an attack on Yuan Tan and completely defeatedhim.
"The Duke is now at Ye city," observed Xiahou Yuan, "and it is four thousand li there and back. Jiang Xu and his people will be destroyed before any report can reach him. That is no way to bring help when it is needed."
When the emperor was in Nanyang, all his attendants accepted bribes and had imperial letters issued appointing numbers of men as gentlemen-cadets.The Grand Commandant Yang Bing sent in a letter to say, "There is a group of stars by the Supreme Subtlety Enclosure which is called the 'Seats of the Court Gentlemen.'40 On the inside, they afford protection to the royal house; on the outside, they guide the common people. You should cut your undue generosity, and block the road of acquisitive demands."
Cao Cao has an army of a million men, replied Zhuge Liang. "He holds the Son of Heaven and so commands the lords. You cannot match him.
Starving and desperate, his men had turned to cannibalism. His Assistant Officer Mi Zhu of Donghai gave aid to the army from his own family property.
Cao Cao had dug a moat around Xiapi, but after some time his menwere exhausted and he was thinking of retreat.
They also said, "If the General-in-Chief kills eunuchs on his own authority, he will be abusing his power and will weaken the national altars [and the imperial state]."
Gongsun Zan had thirty thousand men and his attack was very fierce.
The Retainer Liu Zhen wrote beautifiil essays, and Cao Zhi far preferred him.
Liu Zhang would not attend to this advice, and he sent HuangQuan away to be magistrate of Guanghan.
These Qiang and the other non-Chinese have evil hearts and the nature of dogs. I have not been able to bring them to order, but I shall stay to keep them quiet.
In the third month, as Cao Cao was planning to renew the attack onZhang Xiu, Xun You said, "Zhang Xiu and Liu Biao are allies,
The best thing to do is break off the siege and combine our forces to enter the city. When Han Zhong sees the siege has opened he will certainly come out,
Yuan Shang gave him a few soldiers andsent Pang Ji to stay with him.
and when he had still not returned Zhao Yun, General of the Assistant Army, led several score horsemen from the camp to look for him.Just at this time Cao Cao had brought out a great number of his men, and Zhao Yun encountered them unexpectedly. He went forward to charge their lines, then fought his way back.
And indeed Liu Zhang said to his followers, "I have heard thata man may face the foe to give peace to the people, but I have [451] never heard of shifting the people to avoid an enemy."
Some [studies require] small ability and a low standard of excellence, and one can take note of them, but Confucius did not consider it appropriate to carry them any further.
Before this, the Regular Attendant Zhang Rang had a slave supervisor, who was responsible for all the affairs of his household and had great influence and power.
12 February 172 - 31 January 173
Qianwan, King of the Di, rebelled to join Ma Chao and campedat Xingguo. Xiahou Yuan led his army back.
Yang Feng led his army to Pei, and Liu Bei invited him into thecity. Halfway through the welcome banquet, however, Yang Fengwas arrested, bound hand and foot, and beheaded.
So Ma Teng sent his son Ma Chao with more than ten thousand men to supportZhong Yao.
Concerned that Li Jue would hear of this, the emperor ordered Huangfu Li to leave at once.
Wang Yun had no alternative but to go down and see them.
Those whom he keeps with him are either the disgraced scions of other households, or the dismissed servants of this court. We may surely expect such troubles as were brought by Yang Sheng and Wu Bei.
Liu Zhang arrested Zhang Song and beheaded him, and sent instru ctions to the commanders of the garrisons at the passes that theyshould have no further communication with Liu Bei.
but Li Tong replied, "Weare doing our utmost to support Lord Cao. It would be wrong for meto put private interest before public duty." He praised Zhao Yan forhis upright conduct maintaining the law, and became friends withhim.
The Xianbi brought out Zhao Bao's mother so that he could see her. Zhao Bao called in sorrow to his mother, "As your most unworthy son, I sought to earn a salary so that I might offer you constant care. I had no idea of bringing misfortune upon you. Formerly I was your son, but now I am the servant of the state. My sense of honour will not permit me to follow private affection at the expense of the dictates of loyalty. I would die ten thousand deaths if only I could be spared this wrongful act."
When King Cao of WEI heard of this, he said, "I knew Yu Jin for thirty years, and I never believed that when danger came he would show himself inferior to Pang De."
The Southern Shanyu Yufuluo died. His younger brother Huchu-quan took his place and set his residence at Pingyang.
Slandered by the eunuchs, the former Grand Commandant Zhang Yan was sent to prison and died.
Li Yan, the rebel and bandit of Guiyang, with his followers, ravaged the territory of that commandery,The barbarians of Wuling made another uprising.
Before this, when Cao Cao was at Qiao, he was afraid that thepeople of the commanderies along the Yangzi would suffer raidingby Sun Quan. He planned to bring them closer, and he discussedthe proposal with Jiang Ji, Attendant Officer of Yang province. "Once before, when Yuan Benchu [Yuan Shao] and I werefacing one another with our armies at Guandu, I shifted the inhabi tants of Yan and Boma. That way, they could not defect, and the[448] enemy did not dare attack them.
"The Palace Attendant and Deputy Director of the SecretariatZhong Yao is clever and a fine strategist. If you trust him with thewest, you will have nothing to worry about."
The [office of the] Imperial Clerks saw the way he felt, so they sent in a false report that Zhang Jun had studied the teachings of the Yellow Turbans. Zhang Jun was arrested and flogged. He died in prison.
Someone said to Li Ying, "You can get away."
and Yang Feng set his camp at Liang. Han Xian and Dong Cheng stayed together on guard.
The two men left, but they did no more than collect their own troops and return [to their home country].
Then Lu Fan went out, changed his ordinary clothing for riding costume, took up a whip, and went below the council hall to report for duty as Chief Controller. Sun Ce gave him tallies and credentials and put him in charge of all administration in the army.
The powerful Tian clan of Puyang changed sides, and Cao Cao was able to get into the city. He set fire to the eastern gate to show he had no intention of turning back,
In the spring, in the first month Cao Cao brought his army to Qiao,then to Junyi, and he set the Suiyang Canal in order.
As Yuan Shao approached, ten of Han Fu's staff hastened to abandon him [and join Yuan Shao]. Geng Wu and Min Chun faced them with swords, but could not hold them back and were forced to let them go. Yuan Shao killed the two loyalists.
Liu Bei felt that Lu Bu's speech and conduct were inappropriate. Though he pretended to approve, privately he was quite put off.
Onthe other hand, you have called up loyal soldiers to rid the people ofoppression. You act with honesty and you are relying on good faithto attract brave and able men. As yet, I fear you have not quiteachieved that work.
After dark, Pang De of Nan'an,15 a Colonelunder Ma Chao, brought out a head from his quiver. Zhong Yao sawit and wept.
Then Han Fu and his associates asked Liu Yu to take control of the Imperial Secretariat, with authority to grant enfeoffments and make appointments. Still he would not hear of it, threatening to take refuge amongst the Xiongnu as a means to cut himself off from such proposals. So Yuan Shao and the others gave up the idea.
Liu Biao's territory now extended over several thousand li, andhe had more than a hundred thousand men at arms. He no longersent up tribute, he held state sacrifice and worship to Heaven andEarth and in his lodging and clothing he usurped the regalia of anemperor.
You see my plans and my forces. Are they not sufficient to deal with Guo Duo?
"According to the old regulations, the selection of officials was the particular responsibility of the offices of the Three Excellencies. All that the Masters of Writing were supposed to do was to pass on memorials to the throne. In testing candidates for office, and in appointing officials, they relied on proven worth. If a man failed to do well he was handed over to the Masters of Writing for impeachment and was then sent to the custody of the Minister of Justice. It was the Ministry of Justice which carried out further investigation and administered punishment.
There was a popular song in the streets and alley-ways:Father Jia came too late,Or we would never have made rebellion.Now all is peace and content,And officials dare not feed at our expense.
All wept and said, "Your Excellency had no cause to quarrel with Yuan, and now you have come to this distress for the sake of an official appointed by our emperor. We are your people. How can we abandon you?"
If, however, you seek only to usurp the throne, then you will oppose the trend of our time, and people will leave you. In such a case, who could hope for success?" Yuan Shu was not pleased.
Then Fan Chou planned to take an army east out of the passes,and he asked Li Jue for additional troops.
But how can I seek a reward by under-hand means?"Zhao Zhong was extremely angry, but he was afraid of Fu Xie's reputation and dared not harm him. Fu Xie was sent out to be Administrator of Hanyang.
In the twelfth month on the day renshen [20 Jan 168] Liu Kui, King of Yingtao, was re-established as King of Bohai.
You should first take control of the ThreeAdjuncts. When they are settled, you can issue a call to arms againstHanzhong."
He was notorious for corruption, and even the lavatory in the commandery residence had strange and unusual toys and devices, all of which he took home with him.
Knowing that Yan Rou had gained the affections of theWuhuan, Yuan Shao granted him favours and good treatment sothat he might keep the northern borders at peace.
But then Dong Zhao said, "Military affairs are based upon expediency, and we must choose the most suitable plan.
Wei Gu and his party wanted to bepopular, so they followed his advice.
On the other hand, Qu Yuan and Yan Hui were not without their faults, and how much more did this apply to the other [associates of Confucius]! There is really no need to feel hatred or resentment. It is simply a matter of re-examining oneself."
As the weather began to get hot, and Dong Zhuo had been a big fat man, his fat flowed onto the ground. The men guarding the corpse made a great lamp and set it into Dong Zhuo's navel and lit it, and it burned clear and bright till dawn. This went on for several days.
The Lady Cheng, standing beside him, replied, "Lord Cui is one of the leading men of Ji province. Why should he be prepared to buy his office? You do not realise how lucky you are. It was only through my work that you got anything at all."
Yuan Shao led his army into the Luchang Hills of Chaoge county.He attacked Poison Yu, besieged him for five days and defeated him. He took the heads of Poison and over ten thousand of his men.
When Shen Pei and the others saw Li Fu, they wept for joy,sounded the drums and called out "Ten thousand years!"
In the summer, in the fourth month Dong Zhuo came to Chang'an.The excellencies and ministers all came out to welcome him, and they bowed before his carriage.
Summons were sent to Xun Shuang, Chen Ji, Han Rong and Shentu Pan, scholars of local reputation who had yet received no official rank.
His commander Gao Shun objected, "Your name and yourauthority are well-known and respected everywhere. How can youask for something and fail to obtain it? Yet you are going in personto seek a gift. If for some reason you are not successful, you willsurely lose face." Lü Bu would not agree.
The Minister of Ceremonies Chong Fu said, "As a chief servantof the state, I have failed to prevent violence or resist insult, and so naked swords have been brought against the palace. If I leave, where can I go?"
At that time Zhang Shuo, younger brother of the Junior Attendant of the Yellow Gates Zhang Rang, was magistrate of Yewang. He was greedy, cruel and completely immoral, but he feared Li Ying's strict authority and so he fled back to the capital and hid in a secret chamber within Zhang Rang's house.
Cao Cao had Tian Chou act as guide. Climbing the hills of Xuwu,filling up gorges and gullies for more than five hundred li, they passed by Botan and Pinggang, then headed east through the lands of the Xianbi towards Liucheng.
Then Yuan Shao recommended him as Administrator, and Cao Cao set his government at Dongwuyang.
"In this [Ji] province, the borders are comparatively peaceful,you have a strong army, and the gentry support you. Go west to welcome the imperial carriage, and set the palace at Ye city. If you hold the emperor you will have authority over the other lords, and you can collect men and horses to punish those that will not pay court. Who could dare to oppose it?"
Li Jue, in any case, was jealous of Fan Chou because he was brave and had a large following.
Cao Pi held that,"The case of Tian Chou is the same as that of Ziwen refusing official salary, or Shen Xu fleeing from wealth.We should appreciate his feelings and not force him to accept."
Gongsun Zan went back into You province and dared not come out again.
When one of the Three Excellencies had it in mind to make a personal appointment, he would frequantly ask their opinion, and they would act according to their advice.
Lü Bu also wanted to take Dong Zhuo's treasure and divide it among the excellencies and senior officials, generals and colonels. Again Wang Yun would not approve.
and Yang Feng drove off Guo Si's main attack [against his outer defences]. Guo Si's men retreated, but Zhang Bao and his friends, with the soldiers under their command, went over to Guo Si.
"Liu Bei is among the bravest of men," argued Cao Cao. "If Ileave him now he will surely cause trouble later."
In the autumn, in the seventh month, there was a comet in the Supreme Subtlety [Enclosure].
Dong Zhuo said to Huangfu Song, "The situation of Chencang is extremely perilous, I ask permission to go quickly to its relief."
Yuan Shao wrote to Cao Cao, and his words were proud andcontemptuous.
It is he who arranged your appointment asGeneral Who Maintains the East in Peace, and also the restorationof the Bi Village marquisate. Send messengers with generous giftsto return thanks. That will set his mind at rest. Then say to him, 'Thecapital has no provisions, so I would like the emperor to stay for awhile at Luyang. Since Luyang is close to Xu city, the transport ofsupplies will become easier, and there will be no concern for delaysor shortages.'
Emperor Huan was the first to give this teaching respect and take a personal interest in the ceremonies. Because of this, Buddhist doctrines gradually gained influence, and that is why Xiang Kai mentioned them.
Excessive economy and simpli city may be all very well for one person, but if you seek to forceothers into the same pattern there will be a great deal of injustice.
The Empress He was a jealous woman. When the Beauty Wang gave birth to an imperial son, Liu Xie, in the harem apartments, she poisoned her.
Jia Xu went to call upon Liu Biao, and wastreated as an honoured guest.
An edict ordered that Huangfu Song be appointed once more as General of the Left, to take command over the General of the Van Dong Zhuo, combining their forces to oppose Wang Guo with forty thousand men.
Your majesty should give thought to the great obligations, and return past kindness and care."
King Cao had the Lady Ding care for Cao Ang as if she was his real mother.
When Qianman grew up he fought against Kuitou and the people were scattered.
Then Sun Quan attacked Huang Zu. Huang Zu's army was defeated and driven back, and Sun Quan's Colonel Ling Cao led soldiers in close pursuit.
When Mao Rong returned, he told the others about it. Someone remarked, "Confucius said, 'When a man may be spoken with, not to speak to him is to err in reference to the man.'
In this fashion the region south ofthe [Nanling] ranges came for the first time under the control of SunQuan.
"When Deng Tong was acting negligently, Shentu Jia summoned him and criticised him. Emperor Wen accepted this, and then begged him off.
The junior wife of Yang Qiu was a daughter of Cheng Huang, so Cao Jie and his colleagues had a source of information. They gave Cheng Huang large bribes, and they also applied threats.
On the other hand, the rebels have no supplies, nothing but what they can plunder.
and Han Xian and Yang Feng were very pleased. Theychanged their plans and joined Lü Bu.
So he went to Luoyang and spoke to the Colonel of the City Gates Dou Wu and to the Master of Writing Huo Xu of Wei commandery and others, persuading them to appeal for redress of the wrongs done to the men of Faction.
Recalling Yu Jin's good work at this time and before,he enfeoffed him as Marquis of Yishou Village.
Standing with a halberd below a window of the Covered Way, however, the Master of Writing Lu Zhi glared at Duan Gui and challenged him for his crimes. Duan Gui was frightened, he let go of the Dowager, and she escaped through a side-door.
"At the moment, you and your brother [He Miao] both control strong forces. Your subordinate and divisional commanders are all brave men of fine reputation, fully prepared to carry out your orders. Everything is in your hands, and this is an occasion sent by heaven. Y
When Heaven above shakes with anger, it uses the agency [of our ruler] to carry out its punishments.
In the winter, in the tenth month Yuan Shao brought up morecarts with grain supplies, and he sent Chunyu Qiong and othercommanders with over ten thousand men to escort [286] them. Theyhalted for the night forty li north of Yuan Shao's camp.
He held a farewell ceremony at the Chang Gate,33 and as theysaid goodbye he took Taishi Ci by the arm and asked him, "Whencan you get back?"
Then Huangfu Gui was made General on the Liao, and after a few months in that station he sent in a memorial recommending Zhang Huan: "His ability and strategic sense are both of the highest order, and he is worthy of the highest command. Everyoneis waiting for such a man.
So the main army was able to climb in, and they completely defeated the bandits.
Yuan Shu took title as emperor at Shouchun, calling his newdynasty the House of Zhong. He styled the Administrator of Jiu jiang as Intendant of Huainan, he appointed his own excellenciesand ministers, and he held state sacrifice and worship to Heaven andEarth.
He served Dong Zhuo while hiding his feelings, and Dong Zhuo treated him well and trusted him.
The county magistrate Guo Yi was extremely upset. He came out, took off his seal and ribbon of office, and proposed they flee away together: "The world is large, why should you stay here?"
Han Yan further reported that Ju Gong the Chancellor of [58] Pei, elder brother of the Regular Attendant Ju Yuan, had been collecting bribes.
In the summer, in the fourth month on the day gengzi [9 May?], there was an amnesty for the empire.
A certain Zhu Gongdao happened to hear him. Stealing in bynight, he brought Jia Kui out, broke his fetters and arranged hisescape. He would not [at that time] give his name.
Hearing of Sun Ce's reputation, he came from Shu to visit him, and they became close friends. Zhou Yu urged Sun Ce to come to live in Shu, and when Sun Ce did
and I am sure theywill not harm me if I come as their new ruler. I shall go to themdirect, without an escort, and take them by surprise. Wei Gu hasmany ideas, but he cannot make decisions. He will certainly pretendto accept me,
Before this, though Li Ying and his colleagues had been dismissed and proscribed from office [in 167],all the scholars and gentlemen of the empire paid the highest respect to their conduct and cast all blame upon the court. They sought anxiously to emulate them, and were only concerned that they might fail to match their fine example. Then people got together to publish lists which allocated titles [to the distinguished men of the empire]:Dou Wu, Chen Fan and Liu Shu were the Three Lords: "lord"describes a person whose example the whole world might follow.Li Ying, Xun Yi, Du Mi, Wang Chang, Liu You, Wei Lang, Zhao Dian and Zhu Yu were the Eight Heroes: "hero" means a courageous man.Guo Tai, Fan Pang, Yin Xun and Ba Su, together with Zong Ci of Nanyang, Xia Fu of Chenliu, Cai Yan of Runan and Yang Zhi of Taishan, were the Eight Exemplars: "exemplar" means a person who is able to influence others by his virtuous conduct.Zhang Jian, Zhai Chao, Cen Zhi and Yuan Kang, together with Liu Biao of Shanyang, Chen Xiang of Runan, Kong Yu of Lu kingdom and Tan Fu of Shanyang, were the Eight Guides: "guide" means a person who is able to lead others to follow those of good example.Du Shang, together with Zhang Miao and Wang Xiao of Dongping, Liu Ru of Dong commandery, Humu Ban of Taishan, Qin Zhou of Chenliu, Pi Xiang of Lu kingdom and Wang Zhang of Donglai, were the Eight Treasurers: "treasurer" means a person who is able to rescue people by means of his wealth.
Should the region be taken by the barbarians, they could cause trouble by their great military strength, and this would be of utmost danger to our empire and a serious loss to the nation.
There were great numbers of such men whom Guo Tai brought forward from obscurity as butchers or wine-sellers or the rank and file of soldiery, and who later became celebrated.
Before this, when Dong He had held office in the commanderies, he was honest and temperate, honourable and upright, loved and trusted by both the Chinese and the barbarians. He was respected throughout SHU as an upright official, so Liu Bei chose him.
Guan Yu, moreover, is a stubborn man, and he may think he can maintain two fronts at the same time. He will not retreat quickly."
Zhang Cheng had earlier had contact with the eunuchs on account of his magical techniques, and the emperor had also shown interest in his divinations.
Now I have lost my mother, my heart is confused, and can be no help in your affairs. I therefore beg leave to go."
Looking at things this way, there will soon be another rebellion in Dai."
Liu You has several times held responsibility, and is known for his steadfast determination.
As a result all the scholars of the empire acted modestly and soughtto do their best.Though a minister had honour and favour, he dared not possess a better carriage or finer raiment than regulations allowed. When senior officials came back from their posts they had dirty faces and shabby clothing and rode in wood-carts, and when commanders of the army visited the administrative offices they wore court dress and came on foot.
Before this, King Cao of WEI had taken a wife of the Ding clan, but they had no children. His concubine of the Liu surname gave birth to a son Ang, and his Lady Bian had four sons, Pi, Zhang, Zhi and Xiong.
Zhou Yu brought his troops from Baqiu to attend thefuneral, and he then stayed in Wu to act as Protector of the Army atthe Centre, sharing the government with Zhang Zhao.
The emperor sent Palace Attendants of the Yellow Gates, bearing arms, to bring Lu Qiang to court.
Sun Quan raised a cup of wine and gave it to Gan Ning, saying, "This year, Xingba, I go to the attack. Like this wine, I have decided to entrust it to you.
He also promised them all the loot from YuanShu's army,
Dong Zhuo had the Director of Retainers Liu Ao arrest those of the officials and people who had not been respectful sons, loyal subjects, honest officials or obedient younger brothers. All were executed and their wealth was confiscated.
Liu Yu asked to meet him on several occasions, but Gongsun Zan claimed he was ill and would not agree. Liu Yu suspected that he was preparing to rebel, so he collected the soldiers of his province, a hundred thousand men, and attacked him.
When Guan Yu's people went back, they too told their friends what they had seen. So they all knew that their families had come to no harm, and were actually treated better than in peacetime. Guan Yu's soldiers became less interested in fighting.
Besides this, the officials of the Yellow Gates maintain their wicked ways, and all join in faction.From the time Liang Ji came to power, they cleaved to him like back to belly, they plotted day and night, and they involved one another ever further in evil doings.When Liang Ji was about to meet his punishment, they realised the game was up;so they advertised his wrongdoing in order to obtain rewards and rank.
The WEI soldiers suspected he had set an ambush, so they went away. Then Zhao Yun had the drums beaten to shake the heavens, and he ordered his men to shoot only with strong bows, to take the WEI soldiers from behind.
Yuan Tan had sent Wang Xiu to Le'an to supervise grain transport.When Wang Xiu heard that Yuan Tan was in trouble, he led thesoldiers under his command to come and help him, but as they cameto Gaomi they learned of Yuan Tan's death. Wang Xiu got down from his horse and wept and said,"Without a master, where shall I turn?" He went to Cao Cao andbegged Yuan Tan's body for burial. Cao Cao agreed, and he thensent Wang Xiu back to Le'an to take charge of the supplies for thearmy.
The Yellow Turbans of Guangyang killed the Inspector of You province Guo Xun and the Administrator Liu Wei.
Cao Cao's young son Cangshu [Cao Chong] died, and Cao Cao was extremely sad.
Highflown talk about pure teachings were all the vogue inhis official circle, while the words and style of writings were sorefined and elegant that they could be read aloud with pleasure. Forthe discussion of [203] affairs and examination of facts, however,they were quite impracticable.
Liu Bei asked to surrender to Lü Bu. Lü Bu had quarrelled again with Yuan Shu because the supplies for his army had not been maintained, so he called Liu Bei and restored him to his position as Inspector of Yu province. They joined forces against Yuan Shu, and Lü Bu sent Liu Bei to camp at Xiaopei.
"The high counsellors and great officers are the four limbs of the ruler. Their selection is a weighty responsibility, and requires careful discrimination between the good and the bad. It is quite wrong to pay attention to the criticisms of petty officials against such senior ministers."Again, it would be appropriate to reduce the production of the artisans in the office of the Master of Techniques, and the literary effusions of the Vast Capital school, as a means to demonstrate your concern [for the present situation and the ominous signs].
Furthermore, the Long River [the Yangzi] is your critical line of defence against him,
Sun Quan sent He Qi, General of the Household Who is Majestic and Firm, to attack the bandits of Yi and She in Danyang.
Since that time, their power has tended to subvert the rulers' good judgement, and they have impoverished and oppressed the empire.They should all be dismissed and sent away, and wide search should be made for senior scholars of established virtue to take part in the government."
Then Guo Huai set a firm guard to show he had no intention of retreating, and sent a report of the situation to King Cao of WEI.
Everyone who was there sighed and whispered to one another, "How could he kill two such heroes on a single day?"
He had chain pumps and a thirsty crow set up at the west of the bridge, to spray water down the north-south roads of the suburbs. The emperor planned that this should save his people the expense of scattering water to lay the dust.
On the day of his inauguration, with the emperor in attendance and all the court gathered for the ceremony, the emperor turned to his favourites and said, "We should have kept him waiting a bit longer. We could have got ten million out of him."
Then Zhang Rang and the others said to him, "The empire may have problems, but it is not our fault alone.
Liu Biao, on the other hand, is the sort of fellow who does nothing but sit and talk, and he knows that he is no match for Liu Bei. He must be concerned that Liu Bei will become too powerful if he gives him an important post, but if he gives him a lesser position Liu Bei will be reluctant to serve him. Even though you are leaving your territory empty and going to fight far away, you have no cause for concern.
The Grand Commandant Huang Qiong felt that he was not strong enough to keep things under control, so he declared that he was sick and dying, and sent in a memorial to say, "Since your majesty came to the throne, the government has notsurpassed [the achievements of former rulers]."The Liang family usurped power, but now it is eunuchs that dominate the court. Because they dared speak out loyally, Li Gu and Du Qiao were pointlessly and brutally destroyed. And now Li Yun and Du Zhong, following in their footsteps, have alsobeen punished for holding to the right way of action.All within the seas are distressed and fearful, and are increasingly resentful.It has come to pass that men from both the court and from the country regard loyalty as something taboo.
If you want to see Zijing, you can call on him yourself."
So Chen Gong went to the Attendant Officer and the Headquarters Officer.31 "The empire is divided and our province has no master," he said. "Cao Cao of Dong commandery has ability to command the world. If you invite him to govern the province he will certainly give peace and life to the people."
Yu Fan, Officer of Merit in Kuaiji, said to his AdministratorWang Lang, "Sun Ce is a brilliant [198] military commander. Betterleave now; do not try to face him."
He comforted Yuan Shao's wife, gavetheir treasure back to his family, and presented them with silk andcloth. They also received an allowance of grain from the govern ment.
The excellencies said to Dong Zhuo, "There is an imperial order to withdraw troops."
The people have learnt from the defeats of the past: they will be frightened and will join together as closely as a jacket and its lining.
Cao Cao discussed the question with the marquises and militarycommanders. All agreed that the Imperial Chancellor should be raised in honour to become Duke of the State, while the NineDistinctions of imperial favour should show his special merit.
Yuan Tan made Guan Tong Administrator of Le'an.
but it was at this time Cao Cao's army came up, and Liu Qi fled south of the Yangzi.
In this year Hede, younger uncle of the King of Shule, killed the king and took the throne for himself.
Sun Ce was concerned that Liu Xun had acquired such a strongarmy. He pretended humility and wrote to Liu Xun to say, "TheShangliao clans have often raided my commandery. I want to attackthem, but the approach is difficult.
Though the Yellow Turbans are numerous they are no cause for anxiety to your court.
The commandery and countyadministrations are too weak to deal with the situation, so thefighting men are getting stronger. If they should suddenly turnagainst us, they will certainly cause trouble.
"When you attacked Xu province before, your majestic punish ment was applied too harshly. The sons and younger brothers remember how their fathers and elders were humiliated, so they will guard themselves and have no mind to surrender. You might be able to defeat them but you will not be able to hold them.
I want to raise an army, but I am afraid there may be too few who are willing to accept the summons. What should I do?"
The Qiang discovered this, and Duan Jiong thereupon joined Zhang Kai and his colleagues in an attack on the heights both east and west. The enemy were defeated in a full-scale assault, and were pursued [in both directions, from the middle of Shehu Valley] to the upper and lower passes, and through the mountains and the depths of the valleys.In every place the Qiang were routed, and Duan Jiong's men took the heads of nineteen thousand people, from the leaders downwards.
In the autumn, in the seventh month on the day renzi [5 Aug?], a dark rainbow appeared in the courtyard of the Rear Hall of the Jade Hall.
My original estimate called for three years and 5,400 million cash.But now, after just one year, and with less than half the money spent, the remnants of the enemy are just a few embers, and they are on the point of total destruction.
Those bandits who had lost their families came back and askedto surrender, but Zheng Hun told them to bring some more women, held by other bandits, before he returned them their own.
Or causing a bird to perch above a roaring fire.Water and wood are indeed places where fish and birds may live, but if they are used inappropriately the creatures will be burnt and dead.
In the ninth month Wei Feng collected followers in secret and made plans with Chen Yi, Commandant of the Guards at the Palace of Prolonged Joy, for a coup at Ye. Before the time had come Chen Yi became frightened and told about it.
"So you must hold Fan while I guard Dong'a, and we shall achieve the good work of Tian Dan.
Then Liu Zhang sent Li Yan of Nanyang and Fei Guan ofJiangxia as Protectors of the Army to take control of all the forces atMianzhu, but they too led their troops to surrender to Liu Bei.
In the sixth month on the day gengchen [18 Jul] there was rain and hail, with the hailstones as big as hens' eggs.
"At the time of the amazing military energy of the Epochal Ancestor [Emperor Wu of Former Han], generals and commanders were fine and fierce while government wealth and taxation were full and abundant. They campaigned far and wide, but within a few decades the officials and people were exhausted and there was regret for the former policy.
Zhang Liao said to Xiahou Yuan, "Over the past few days,whenever I walk about the camp Chang Xi has looked at me verycarefully, and there have not been many shots fired.
If you can withstand a long siege, Yuan Shao may beforced to retreat.
and on the night of bingshen [22 May] he brought soldiers to attack Li Jue's gates. An arrow came through the curtains of the emperor's tent, and another hit Li Jue in the right ear.
The siege works were set inseveral [453] rings about the city, and during the night Yan Wenstealthily followed the river.
There are people who speak slander in the hope of some short term advantage. They are pushing you into a family quarrel, but Ibeg you to close your ears and pay no attention.
Dong Zhuo destroyed the Wushu currency and minted smaller coins.He melted down the statues of Luoyang and Chang'an, such as the Bronze Men, the Zhongju, the Feilian and the Bronze Horses,to cast the new money.So the currency was devalued and goods became dear: the price of a single shi of grain rose to several ten thousand cash.
In the autumn, in the seventh month the Palace Counsellor Chen Fan became Grand Commandant.
In the twelfth month Sun Quan himself led an army to lay siege to Hefei. He also sent Zhang Zhao to attack Dangtu in Jiujiang, but Zhang Zhao had no success.
Yuan Shao has designs upon the empire, but he is not nearly clever enough. Could you really accept him as your leader?
WEI appointed the General of the Household for All Purposes, Cao Pi, as Heir.
He was completely successful in war, and his virtue in civil pursuits was in harmony to those achievements.
A certain Zhang Fan was a wealthy merchant in Wan.24 He had long been in close contact with the members of the imperial harem, and he was extremely good at engraving objects of art and items of fancy. He had occasionally given them as bribes to the eunuchs, and in this way he had a splendid position and was able to use his influence arrogantly and unlawfully.
Lord Yuanseeks to imitate the Duke of Zhou by being polite to men of talent,but that is all. He does not comprehend the finer points of how toget men to serve him.
Ju Yuan had guards arrest Zhang Yun on the charge that he had entered the palace without proper authorisation and was planning some act of rebellion.
When Xia Fu heard how Zhang Jian had escaped, he sighed and said, "He brought this misfortune upon himself, then pointlessly caused the involvement of other good and honest people. Ten thousand households suffered misfortune so that one man might escape death. How could he live with that?"
The emperor did not take the matter seriously, and just at that time an edict commissioned Liu Tao to write a commentary, the Chunqiu tiaoli, on the Spring and Autumn Annals.
When Wu Shu of Xiapi was named magistrate of Wan, he went to pay his respects to Liang Ji before he left for his new post.There were numbers of Liang Ji's clients in the county,and Liang Ji asked Wu Shu to treat them kindly.Wu Shu replied, "Wicked men and corrupt officials may be found everywhere, and they should always be punished.
If the Mandate of Heaven rests with me, said Cao Cao, "let me act as King Wen of Zhou."
When Liu Bei left Xinye to escape to the south of the Yangzi, the great majority of officials from Jing province had followed him like clouds.
Yang Biao, however, thought that it was too difficult and dangerous for the emperor to travel on the Yellow River. So he had Li Le cross the River by night, get a boat ready quietly and then light a fire [as a sign of the landing place they should aim for].
Put Zhu Yu to the question, and if things are not the way I describe them, then I am willing to be boiled alive and have my wife and children driven into exile; this would surely put a stop to any idle slanders."
Liu Biao wrote in protest to Yuan Tan, "When a gentlemanfinds himself in difficulty, he does not ally himself with an enemy state. When friendship comes to an end, he does not abuse hisformer comrades. How much serious must it be to [320] abandonyour own kinsfolk and turn to your father's enemy? You act againstthe moral teachings of all the ages and you shame me as an ally.
The people of SHU territory have been acting as they please, and the code of behaviour between ruler and subject has steadily declined.
In the eleventh month Dong Zhuo combined forces with Bao Hong of Youfufeng to attack Bian Zhang and Han Sui. They thoroughly defeated them, and Bian Zhang and Han Sui fled to Yuzhong.
The woman wept and got up. Then Qiu Xiang went himself to Chen Yuan's house, and he explained to him the proper relationships of mankind and the proper conduct of a filial son, illustrating his talk with examples of the good or ill fortune which came in retribution.Chen Yuan was touched and impressed, and became a most filial son.
"Now I have heard that Liu Kui, the King of Bohai, has collected around him companions who are frivolous, arrogant and never satisfied. Within his palace he holds orgies of wine and music, and in his public behaviour there is no good order.
Several score merchants and other fellows of mean origin had been gathered together as Filial Sons of the Mound of Comprehension. By imperial edict, all of them were appointed as Members of the Suite of the Heir-Apparent.
The former Excellency over the Masses Chen Dan was a loyal and upright man, but the eunuchs hated him. They slandered him and he died in jail.
In the fifth month on the day re^nchen, last of the month [4 Jul], there was an eclipse of the sun.
Later, when the men of Faction were executed, Zhang Rang recalled Chen Shi's courtesy, and on his account there were many who were protected by him and pardoned.
With the Staff of Authority as military commander, Huangfu Gui had now returned to take control in his own home country.Though he accepted no private favours, there were many people whom he had reported or impeached, while he also hated the eunuchs and would have no dealings with them.
In the third month, on the day yisi [27 Apr] the emperor came to Chang'an,20 where he stayed in the official residence of Jingzhao commandery. 21 Only later were the palace buildings put into sufficient repair that he could live in them.
Later, there was an old man who left a sword on the road, and a man passing by saw it and stayed by it.
He must be down-hearted. Armies take their leaders astheir guide: if the leader is discouraged then the army loses heart.
"When all is ready, choose your best men and send out raidingparties.4 Take advantage of his weak points to break through in oneplace or another so as to trouble the territory south of the YellowRiver. If he relieves the right, you attack the left; if he sends help tothe left, you attack him on the right.
The Attendant Officer Han Heng of Dai commandery said, "Ihave received great favours from the lords Yuan, father and son.Even though they are defeated and lost, I would be lacking inhonour if I were neither wise enough to aid them nor strong enoughto give my life for them.
As the empire fell into disorder Xun Yu said to his elders, "Yingchuan is exposed to attack on all sides. We should get away quickly."
Now they have suffered three years of war, and their bodies are scattered in the wilderness. All this has happened because of me. How can I be easy in my mind?”
Liu Bo, King of Rencheng, died. He had no sons and his kingdom was abolished.
Then Chen Yi died, and Bian Zhang and the others came forward to besiege Zuo Chang in Ji.
Intending to attack Tadun, Cao Cao dug the Pinglu Trench and the Quanzhou Trench to bring up his supplies.
Xun You said, "Despite all the activity elsewhere, Liu Biao hasdone nothing but hold his position between the Yangzi and the Han.It is clear that he has no broader ambitions. The Yuan, on the otherhand, hold the territory of four provinces, with almost half a millionmen under arms.
Later this was found out, and the Chancellor of [Lu] kingdom arrested both Kong Bao and Kong Rong, and sent them to prison without having determined the culprit.
In the autumn, in the seventh month on the day jiazi [1 Sep], the Grand Commandant Huang Qiong left office and the Minister of Ceremonies Hu Guang became Grand Commandant.
Whenever he spoke to the emperor, he would always address him as "Wise Majesty" or "Wise Emperor," and would describe Guo Si as wicked and recalcitrant. The emperor replied accordingly
and Zhu Jun pressed his attacks still more fiercely.Leading his troops, the Major Sun Jian was the first to climb the walls, and on the day guisi [11 Jan 185] they stormed Wan city.
Earlier, as each group of the leaders within the passes came up tofight him, Cao Cao had looked more and more pleased.
Liu Bei sent back urgent instructions to raise all the forces of Yi province. Zhuge Liang asked the Attendant Official Yang Hong of Jianwei about it. "Hanzhong is the critical route into Yi province," replied Yang Hong. "This is the turning point of survival or destruction: unless we control Hanzhong, we do not possess SHU.
When Chen Fan was Administrator of Yuzhang, he very politely requested Xu Zhi to be his Officer of Merit.Xu Zhi could not [flatly] decline, but he called only once and then went home.
From the time of Zhang Jue's rebellion, bandits and rebels had sprung up everywhere. There was Ox-horn Zhang of Boling,11 Flying Swallow Chu of Changshan, and innumerable other groups under such leaders as Yellow Dragon, Enclosure of the Left, Yu Digen, White Rider Zhang, Liu Shi, Zuo with the Long Moustache, Grand Design to Pacify Han, Director of Retainers Who Scales the City Wall, Lord of Thunder, Floating Clouds, White Sparrow, Phoenix Yang, Poison Yu, Five Deer, Big-eyes Li, Bo Rao, Sui Gu and Kujiu "Dry Grub."The larger of them controlled twenty or thirty thousand men, the smaller Ox-horn Zhang and Flying Swallow Chu
The people look up to you. Go and encourage them."
Before this, Liu Biao had two sons, Qi and Zong. Liu Biao had arranged for Zong to marry the niece of his later wife of the Cai clan, so the Lady Cai loved Zong and disliked Qi.
6 February 159 - 25 January 160
Yang Yuanqun, a man of powerful family from Wanling, left his post in Beihai commandery.
Jian'an 16: 211 AD
He appointed Yuan Yan as General of the Household for All Purposes, and later transferred him until he became Minister Herald.
While Cao Cao was besieging Ye, Yuan Tan had again turned away[from their agreement]. Taking a loose control over Ganling,Anping, Bohai and Hejian,
The Palace Counsellor Liu Ju became Grand Commandant.
"You," she abused him, "are a rebellious son who [456] abandonedhis father. You are a cruel brigand who murdered his lord. How canHeaven and Earth tolerate you for long? And unless you die soon,how can you face the sight of men?" Ma Chao killed her. He alsokilled Zhao Ang's son Yue.
Zhao Zhong and Xia Yun now added further slanders: "When Lu Qiang was called to court, he had no idea what questions would be put to him, but he went straight outside and killed himself. It is only too clear that he was guilty."
Guan Ning said to Bing Yuan, "A hidden dragon fulfils its virtue by not being seen.
When Tao Qian arrived he attacked the Yellow Turbans, completely defeated them and put them to flight.The territory of the province was at peace.
"A man with the ambition of a ruler will certainly forget privateenmities in order to display his virtue before all the four seas; that isa third reason for us to join him.
Pang De carried himself straight and would not bow. Guan Yu said to him, "You have a cousin in Hanzhong, and I should be pleased to have you as one of my officers. Why did you not surrender sooner?"
In the twelfth month the emperor returned to the capital and paid a visit to the Imperial University.
Zhang Jue sent out disciples to travel through every part of the empire and to convert the people of the eight provinces Qing, Xu, You, Ji, Jing, Yang, Yan and Yu to his deceitful doctrines.
At this time a strong wind was blowing from the southeast. Huang Gai collected his ten ships and put them in the van. Halfway across the Yangzi he set sail, and the other ships followed in order.
Dong Zhuo's supporters wished to honour him as the Grand Duke and give him the title Honoured Uncle.
"The Book of Zhou has said, 'If the Son of Heaven observes strange signs, then he will reform his virtue. If a feudal lord observes strange signs, then he will reform his government. If a minister or great officer observes strange signs, then he will reform the manner in which he carries out his duties. If an ordinary gentleman or commoner observes strange signs, then he will reform himself.'
Now you have just oneenvoy from Lord Cao, and you act as if you are afraid you may never get there. Why?"
No-one can restrain their extravagance and their pride;they impoverish the empire and exhaust the people.
Yuan Shang, also defeated, fled to Quzhang and fortified him self there.12 Cao Cao laid siege to him, but before he had closed thering Yuan Shang became frightened and sent messengers asking tosurrender. Cao Cao refused, and encircled him yet more closely.
Furthermore, if Wu of Wei had become Emperor, then Xun Yuwould have received much of the credit for bringing it about and hewould have received the same reward as Xiao He.
Then Sun Quan had Lü Meng, Protector of the Army of the Right and General with the Majesty of a Tiger, take the position, serving concurrently as Administrator of Hanchang.
Tao Qian died, and Mi Zhu led the people of the province to invite Liu Bei.
Those [in attendance upon the emperor] in the upper part of the hall, however, said with a loud voice, "Does the Minister of the Guards oppose the imperial command?" And this was repeated two or three times, until Yang Qiu at last accepted his new commission.
When Guo Tai heard of the deaths of the men of Faction, he mourned them in private, saying, "The Classic of Poetry has, Good men are going away, And the country will certainly fall into ruin.
Yang Fu's brother-in-law JiangXu of Tianshui was General Who Cherishes Barbarians and com manded troops in camp at Li city.
"Yet now this group of eunuch attendants, a gang of evil-doers, because they are angry at the penalties inflicted upon other members of their gang, have spread wild stories to bring [these officers] into threat of serious punishment. Even these words of mine may lead to their tearful complaints, and so bring me slander and disgrace.
You pretend that you will submit and obey, but in fact you have not made up your mind. Time is pressing: unless you make a decision, misfortune may come at any moment."
With every person in the household competing for the death penalty, the local offices could not come to a decision. The matter was referred to the court, and in the end, by imperial degree, Kong Bao was found to be responsible.
As a man, Yang Bing was pure and upright, with few desires or wishes. He once remarked of himself, "There are three things which do not affect me: wine, women and wealth."
and Wuyan of Youbeiping, with rather more than eight hundred groups, called himself Hanlu King.
Li Jue and his fellows came again to the attack, and this time Yang Feng and the allies were utterly defeated, with greater casualties than at Dongjian.
Just at that time King Qiao [i.e. Supuyan] had fivethousand horsemen ready to help Yuan Tan, and Gongsun Kanghad also sent Han Zhong to grant him a seal and ribbon as Shanyu.
Hou Lan and Duan Gui reported this to the emperor, and Teng Yan was found guilty.He was ordered to report to the Ministry of Justice and was then dismissed from office.
btlety is the heavenly court, the seat of the Five Emperors, and the punishing stars of Metal [Venus] and Fire [Mars] were shining there.
Those chosen to stay were quite content, and the ones told off to go did not dare object.
In the third month Zhang Fei and Ma Chao withdrew.
Yuan Shao and his uncle Yuan Wei forged imperial orders summoning Fan Ling and Xu Xiang, and had them beheaded.
If you will delay the tax just alittle, I can solve the problem for you."
"Tong Zhi of Danyang has seized Luling for himself, and theleaders of the Poyang people have set up clan troops, saying 'Wehave set up our own commandery [245] administrations at Haihunand Shangliao, and we take no orders from anyone.' Ziyu simplylooks on and does nothing."
All the commanderies and counties of Yan province now turned to Lu Bu, and only Juancheng, Fan and Dong'a remained loyal.
He went on alone to attack them, leaving Dong Zhuo as rear-guard. In a series of engagements he completely defeated them, cutting off some ten thousand heads.
Cao Pi was momentarily at a loss, but then Wu Zhi of Jiyin whispered to him, "As the King is about to leave, you weep."
The Registrar reported that there were three sheng of rice in the inner kitchen, and asked for a little to make porridge. Zang Hong sighed and said, "How can I enjoy this alone?"
Yet your majesty has given ear to slanders from your castrate minions and as a result, without paying close attention to the matter, you have ordered them arrested and interrogated.
"Furthermore, the terms of some officers appointed to these posts have been restricted to [a certain number of] months or years. The positions then lie vacant, the region for ten thousand l is desolate and empty, and there is no control of affairs.
By the time he came to Dangyang Liu Bei's followers numbered more than a hundred thousand, the baggage was in several thousand carts, and he could travel only about ten li in a day.
You, wise general, may rest on a high pillow with your doors open [in security and confidence]. Why should you be concerned or frightened?"
"Yuan Shao is fascinated by empty show, and he does notappreciate the essentials of war, but you can defeat a host ofmen with a few and you use soldiers like a spirit. The people ofthe army trust you and the masses of the enemy fear you. Thisis superior military skill."
When he arrived at Ju, however, Zang Ba and his fellows didnot understand why Lü Bu was coming against them. They [221]defended their positions and forced him away, so he came backempty-handed.
Fan Pang had knelt to receive his mother's instruction, and he bowed to bid her farewell.
"Now a rainbow has descended, and a chicken has changed its sex. These are signs that the interference of women in affairs of government has come to a critical point.
All the rewards and grants he obtained from the two palaces [of the emperor and the empress his daughter] were distributed among the students of the University or given as charity to the poor.
There were robbers and bandits ranging in all directions and the roads were blocked. Unaccom- panied by any escort, Liu Biao rode on horseback to Yicheng and invited Kuai Liang and Kuai Yue, well-known scholars of Nanyang, to make plans with him."South of the Yangzi," he observed, "there are numbers of clan armies. Each has its own followers, and none have any loyalty to the others. If Yuan Shu obtained their support, they could cause tremendous trouble
Cao Cao recommended him as Libationer to the Excellency ofWorks.
But he is a man with several black marks against his record, and he is liable to act excessively and impetuously. He should not be allowed to continue as Director of Retainers, maintaining this hasty and brutal administration."
As Sun Quan had now returned to his allegiance,King Cao of WEI called Zhang Liao and the others back [from Hefei] to relieve Fan. Before they arrived, however, the siege was broken.
Because of the arsenal there, Cao Cao was afraid Liu Bei might occupy Jiangling, so he left his baggage and went to Xiangyang with light-armed troops.
We may say that when Lord Cao enfeoffed Yan Pu he showed true understanding of the proper bases for rewards and punish- 4] ments.
"If it clears the shame of a lord and father," replied Yi firmly,"to lose one's head is of small moment. That is even more true for ason."
When Fa Zheng came back he said to Zhang Song that Liu Beiwas a man with great ideas, and the two men made secret planstogether to invite Liu Bei to take over the province.
It is obvious that even if there were ten thousand people minting cash, so long as one man was taking it all there could never be enough to go round.How much more does this apply when only one man [the ruler] is producing the money, and ten thousand snatch it away.
"Your majesty should remember how Yu-Shun dealt with the four criminals, and should quickly arrange the execution of your false advisers. Then good men will be glad to come forward and evil will naturally disappear."
Yuan Shu had made Zhou Yu magistrate of Juchao and appointedLu Su of Linhuai as magistrate of Dongcheng.
A common fellow, replied Cao Cao.
Li Jue sent Wang Chang, one of the guards Rapid as Tigers, to call Huangfu Li back, intending to kill him. Recognising that Huangfu Li was loyal and honest, however, Wang Chang let him go and told Li Jue that "We chased him but could not catch him."
He reported to Cao Cao, andindeed Cao Cao did not have the rebels killed.
On the day yichou [15 May] the Grand Commandant Qiao Xuan left office, and was appointed a Palace Counsellor. The Palace Counsellor Duan Jiong became Grand Commandant.
If a great army then sails fast day and night up the Yangzi and attacks the places he has left unprotected, Nan commandery can be captured and Guan Yu taken."
Then Sun Ce attacked Taishi Ci at Yongli, and captured him.
In the fifth month on the day bingxu [18 Jun] the Grand Commandant Yang Bing died.
If you want something foryourself, you can rise up and take advantage of their difficulties.Even if you have no ambitions of your own, you should certainlychoose one of them to follow.
The provinces and commanderies were crowded with fighting men,
Cao Cao appointed Mao Jie of Chenliu as his Headquarters Officer. Mao Jie said to him, "The empire is divided and falling, the ruler is in exile and his people have left their occupations: they hunger and wander and die. The government has less than a year's reserve of food and the people have no sense of security. Things cannot remain like this.
The Empress Song was not receiving the emperor's favours. Many of the concubines in the harem, benefiting from their own good fortune, combined to slander and injure her.
Some senior officials at the capital memorialised for Zhu Jun,s recall, but the Excellency of Works Zhang Wen wrote to the emperor, "In ancient times, Qin used Bo Qi and Yan gave office to Yue Yi. Both spent years doing nothing, but in the end their enemies were defeated.
Though Xu Zhi would not accept appointments from any of the excellencies, he nonetheless recognised their deaths with rituals of mourning as if for a patron, and he would travel to the funeral carrying his own baggage.
Xun Yu told Cao Cao of this program, and Cao Cao followed it.
"When the four harmful things are done away with29 and thefive good points established; and if they are practised sincerely andmaintained firmly; behaving simply without being casual, andacting leniently without being loose – then the emperor may sit withclothing draped and hands folded, practising etiquette and the rulesof propriety, and all within the seas will be at peace."
Cao Cao wanted to go himself to attack Lü Bu, but his officerssaid, "Liu Biao and Zhang Xiu are behind you. If you leave to attackLü Bu they will certainly be a threat."
When Yang Ding, however, heard that Li Jue and Guo Si were coming, he wanted to go back to Lantian. Guo Si cut him off, and he escaped to Jing province alone and on horseback.
The Regular Attendant Lu Qiang sent in a memorial to protest: "All the wealth of the empire comes from the benevolence of nature and then is brought to your majesty. How can you make distinction between public funds and your private reserves?
Chen Ji was the son of Chen Shi, Han Rong was the son of Han Shao.
Lu Su, however, argued against them, that we should do no such thing. He urged me to call Zhou Yu to take command of the army to face and attack the invaders. This was the second occasion that caused me pleasure.Later he encouraged me to cede territory to Xuande [Liu Bei],
"No more than sixty days," replied Taishi Ci.
"In the south,"replied Yuan Shao, "I would hold the Yellow River, and in the northI would reach to Yan and Dai. Then I could collect the hosts ofbarbarians in the north and turn south to fight for the empire. Thatshould do it."
At this time, Wang Fu was taking a holiday at his private estate, and Duan Jiong had just presented a [formal] offer of self-incrimination on account of the recent eclipse.
When Han Sui and Ma Chao made their rebellion, many of thecounty cities of Hongnong and [Zuo]pingyi had joined them. Onlythe people of Hedong remained consistently loyal.
He treated him with great courtesy, allowed him to retain all his troops, and appointed him Administrator of Jiangxia.
Yin Xun and Shan Bing now recommended the arrest of Cao Jie and others, and Liu Yu was sent to take the memorial into the palace.
Du Ji also said to Wei Gu and his fellows, "It is only naturalthat a man should be concerned for his family. Let your officerstake turns to go home on leave. It will not be difficult to call themback when you need them."
Yuan Shu was afraid Lü Bu would become a threat to him, so hesought a marriage alliance through his son. Lü Bu agreed. Yuan Shu sent his officer Ji Ling to lead thirty thousand horseand foot against Liu Bei, and Liu Bei asked help from Lü Bu.
As General-in-Chief, your excellency holds position above all others.It is your natural duty to bring forward men of worth and quality to fill the positions of government.
Dong Zhuo sent in another memorial, "Despite my lack of merit, I have received your heavenly favour and held military command for ten years. My officers and men of every rank have long been close to me. They appreciate my generous care, and are always ready to obey my orders. I beg to take them with me to the north, to assist in the defence of the frontier."
Furious, Zhang Fei ordered his attendants to lead Yan Yan out and cut off his head.
and after Ma Chao and the others had been defeated, there were stillmore than twenty thousand bushels left over.
Just act swiftly, and think no more ofme. I can decide this for you now, and for the rest of my life I shallcause you no further trouble."
If he sees that I have very few, he will paylittle attention and will not attack. If you add to my troops, however,then if he passes by he is sure to attack, and if he attacks he willcertainly win. Both you and I would lose strength. Please have nodoubts."
Sun Quan replied, "Now I am putting all the strength of mydomain to help and support the house of Han. What you propose isfar beyond my ability."
"The reason I make no investigation" explained Cao Cao, "is that I want to protect both Mao Jie and his accusers."
When the letter was sent in, Dou Wu made excuse of ill health to return the seals and ribbons of [his position as] Colonel of the City Gates and [his enfeoffment as] Marquis of Huaili.
？
Then Cao Cao divided Ba commandery, appointing Fuhu as Administrator of Badong and Duhu as Administrator of Baxi, while Ren Yue became Administrator of [the rump] Ba commandery. All were enfeoffed as marquises.
I am afraid that their petty trickery will harm the cause of righteous reform, for their reputation is groundless and false. You should make a special investigation of them."
Before this, Gan Ning of Ba commandery had brought eight hundred retainers to join Liu Biao.Liu Biao was a weak man and would not practise for war. Realising that he was certain to fail, Gan Ning was afraid that when his followers were scattered he would share their fate. He wanted to go east into Wu.
andin the end you will have nothing more than the seal of a marquis, adozen servants, a few chariots and a few horses. Is this the same as aseat facing south and the style of 'the solitary man'? "The best thing is to refuse his demand and wait quietly to seewhat happens.
Then Yongqiu was taken, Zhang Chao killed himself and Cao Cao destroyed his family and clan.
In his reply, the Consultant Cai Yong said: "I have ventured to consider the various strange happenings, and all of them are signs of a state that is being destroyed.
Han Fu was annoyed that so many of the leading men had turned to Yuan Shao, so he quietly cut down on his supplies, in hope that his army would drift apart.
Then Cao Cao attacked and defeated Tao Qian, and the territory of Xu had no peace. Zhai Rong led ten thousand men and women to Guangling, where the Administrator Zhao Yu received him with the courtesy of a guest.
In such a case, customs will have neither faultnor perversity, and the people will have no inclination to evil. Thisis what is meant by 'keeping customs well'.
Trained soldiers were raised from the empire,11 and the General of the Household of the North Lu Zhi was sent to attack Zhang Jue. HuangfU Song, as General of the Household on the Left, and the General of the Household on the Right Zhu Jun were sent to attack the Yellow Turbans of Yingchuan.
and in the ninth month, with anotherdivision of his army left in garrison at Guandu, he returned to Xucity.
Qiao Xuan, however, looked at them angrily and cried, "These are wicked men and evildoers. How can I let banditry loose upon the state for the sake of one child's life?" He ordered them to attack, and his son was killed in the fighting.
Now the court is wandering and in flight, and the imperial ancestral temples are destroyed. Look at the provinces and commanderies: their rulers pretend to maintain troops for the emperor, but in secret each is planning against the other. There is no concern for the national altars and no thought of giving rest to the people.
Deserters from Lu Bu's army said, "Chen Gong is coming to take Dong'a, and he will send Fan Yi to capture Fan."
In the summer in the fourth month there was a rebellion among the barbarians of Jiangxia commandery.
but the Major-General Li Dian ofJulu said, "The enemy had no reason to run away, and I am surethey will lay an ambush.
In the summer, in the fifth month on the day bingyin [15 Jun] the emperor sent a messenger to the camps of Yang Feng, Li Le and Han Xian, asking them to escort him to Luoyang. Yang Feng and the others obeyed the edict.
"Liu Zhi the Administrator of Taiyuan and Cheng Jin the Administrator of Nanyang have the ambition to eliminate evil and wickedness, and the punishments they carried out fulfilled the hopes of the people.
So the gentry stirred up in their anger, and hatred was bred within all the four seas. Then He Jin called to arms, Dong Zhuo took advantage of discontent, and men like Yuan Shao made trouble everywhere. The emperor became a homeless wanderer, the temples of the imperial clan were laid waste, the royal house was destroyed and all the people were in mud and ashes. The Mandate was broken, never to be restored.
the fields and country-side are empty; the court is empty; the granaries and storehouses are empty.
Liu Yu, however, presented a further eight thousand words, reiterating even more forcefully the same true opinions as he had before. He was appointed a Consultant.
Liu Bei sent his Assistant Officer Pang Tong to act as magistrate ofLeiyang. The county was badly governed, so he dismissed him.
"I rcognise that the enfeoffments have already been carried out, and so my remarks are too late. The reason I risk death with my foolish but loyal words is because I truly wish that your majesty would abandon your mistaken policy, and that there will be an end to such errors hereafter.
while when the junior officers and people in Jiangheard Jia Kui might be killed they climbed on the city walls andshouted, "If Guo Yuan turns back on the agreement and kills ourworthy leader, it would be better for all of us to die."
Thus Heaven will be in harmony above, and Earth will be contented below. Good fortune and auspicious influences, how then can they be kept away?" The emperor would not accept this.
"But now [we have these] petty fellows, of false and empty quality, with no essential relationship of flesh and blood, who never received any personal favour [from the late ruler]. They are, moreover, quite without the real quality [suitable for] official appointment, and they lack the proper natural sympathies. There is no way in which [these appointments] can be justified."And there are even criminals amongst their number.
Before this, the Grand Tutor Ma Midi had come with Zhao Qi as envoys to Shouchun. Zhao Qi maintained his dignity without wavering, and Yuan Shu was intimidated by him.
I ask that yourestrain the bravery of Meng Ben and Xia Yu, and maintain theconduct of a hegemon king."
Hu Teng of Guiyang, who was Attendant Officer in Charge of Conveyances,37 made the proposal that, "The Son of Heaven is always at the centre of the empire;38 wherever his carriage may go, there is the capital.
Xianfu [Yuan Shang] has Xiansi [Yuan Tan] in trouble, but he cannot defeat him, and this is because his strength is exhausted.
Then Huangfu Song sent in a report to the throne, giving credit to Zhu Jun for his work, and Zhu Jun was advanced in fief to be Marquis of Xi District and was transferred to appointment as General of the Household Who Maintains the Rebels in Order.
Dong Zhuo sent the Minister Herald Han Rong, the Minister Steward Yin Xiu, the Bearer of the Mace Humu Ban, the Court Architect Wu Xiu and the Colonel of Elite Cavalry Wang Gui to negotiate with Yuan Shao and his allies and make peace with the east of the mountains.
Then Tian Chou proclaimed his code. Those who killed or wounded one another, those who robbed and those who quarrelled should answer for their fault according to its severity. The heaviest penalty was death. Altogether there were some twenty articles.
Liu Bei's troops amounted to several ten [269>] thousandmen, and he sent messengers to contact Yuan Shao with a view tojoint operations.
Cao Cao exposed Yuan Shang's head, and gave orders to the whole army that "Anyone who dares weep for him will be executed."
"This is borrowing and not paying back," said Sun Quan. "He just wants to gain time with empty excuses."
Before this, when Cao Cao was in Yan province he recom mended Wei Chong as Filial and Incorrupt.
I was thinking of something, replied Jia Xu, "so I did not respond immediately."
In the autumn, in the seventh month, Liu Bei named himself King ofHanzhong. He set up an altar at Mianyang, arrayed his soldiers and people in order, and all the ministers took their places. He read out a memorial, took seal and ribbon, and put on a cap of royalty.
Xiahou Yuan was appointed General Chief Protector, with authority over Zhang He, Xu Huang and others to hold Hanzhong, while the Chief Clerk to the Chancellor Du Xi became Commandant of Attendant Cavalry, responsible for administration.
In the winter, in the tenth month on the day yisi [29 Oct] they buried the Thoughtful Empress of Emperor Ling.
"I haveheard," replied Chen Gong, "that a man who gives gentle govern ment to the empire will not cut off another man's sacrifices [bykilling his heir]. Whether my family lives or not, that rests with you,not with me."
The General of the Household for All Purposes is loving and filial, intelligent and wise, well worthy to maintain the line of succession. I shall hold this to the death."
The Administrator of Luling, Sun Fu, was afraid Sun Quan wouldnot be able to hold the east of the Yangzi, and he sent men in secretwith letters to call Cao Cao.
Confucianists and ordinary scholars, answered Sima Hui, "what can they know about the important affairs of the day? Only exceptional men comprehend such matters.
You will have taken the offensive but gained no success, and whenyou seek to retreat you will have no place to turn.
At the end of his resources, with all his troops scattered, he wassad and depressed and had no idea what to do. He sent a messengerto offer the title to his cousin Yuan Shao, saying: "Prosperity haslong departed from the house of Han. The Yuan have received themandate to rule; auspicious influences shine out in splendour.
The Master of Writing Liu Na said, "When a man is acting as a pillar of the state, but offers no support in time of danger, what use is he?"
Jia Xu encouraged Zhang Xiu to join Liu Biao, and Zhang Xiufollowed this advice.
After several days he asked to see CaoCao and said, "Yang Biao has been examined and makes no change in his statement. This man is known within all the four seas. If youpunish him without firm evidence of his guilt, you will certainlylose many people's affections. In my humble opinion, you shouldreconsider the matter."
"There are already five or six parks outside the city,11 quite enough to make anyone content, and adequate for all the four seasons.
Wang Yun said, "If I have received blessing from the national altars, then my only wish would be to give peace to our country. If this cannot be achieved, then I offer myself to die for it.
being Chapter 56 of the Chronicle of Han
