"Yuan Shao uses fine talk and ceremony to attract men ofgood repute, and many scholars who love words and orna mental show will turn to him.
When I die, I wish to be buried on the slopes of Shouyang Mountain. On the one hand, I shall not be turning away from Heaven, and at the same time I shall feel no shame before [Bo]yi and [Shu]qi."
Someone reported it, and Sun Quanbeheaded all Sun Fu's close [296] companions, redistributed hisfollowers, and exiled him to the east.
The emperor was furious with Zhang Rang, but Zhang Rang kowtowed and begged for pardon, and in the end he was able to avoid any punishment.
But now it appears that the men of Faction are servants of the state while you people follow Zhang Jue. Why shouldn't I have you beheaded?"The eunuchs kowtowed and said, "This was all the fault of Wang Fu and Hou Lan."
The Excellency of Works Zhang Ji left office. The Minister of Finance Zhang Wen became Excellency of Works.
In the winter, in the tenth month on the day gengyin [4 Nov?], Yang Ci died. He had been marquis of Linjin, and his posthumous title was Brilliant Cultivation.
Li Jue and Guo Si fought one another for months on end, and the dead were numbered in the tens of thousands.
"On the other hand, should anyone suggest that I give up my[413] army, hand over my power, and retire to my fief at Wuping,then that just cannot be.
Talking about the Liang clan will lead to talk about the emperor, and that may bring disaster once again.We must accept the misfortune that is past, and take responsibility for the present upon ourselves."
"Ill-mannered fellow,M replied Yan Yan. "You have invaded our province, but our province has only generals who take heads, not generals who surrender.
Yuan Shao sent messengers to call on Zhang Xiu, and he also wroteto Jia Xu to suggest an alliance.
then good officials will know that it is worthwhile to support the state, and wrongdoers will realise the dangers they run by their private plunder of public property. The barbarian horsemen can be prevented from spying along the Great Wall, and the men who keep watch on the frontier will have no further cause to fear harm."
Cao Cao recommended that Wang Lang be called to court, andSun Ce allowed him to return.
The Retainer Liu Zhen wrote beautifiil essays, and Cao Zhi far preferred him.
"Tong Zhi of Danyang has seized Luling for himself, and theleaders of the Poyang people have set up clan troops, saying 'Wehave set up our own commandery [245] administrations at Haihunand Shangliao, and we take no orders from anyone.' Ziyu simplylooks on and does nothing."
In the winter, Gu Yong the Administrator of Yulin, by honest and gracious conduct, induced the surrender of more than a hundred thousand of the Wuhu people. They were all brought into settlement within the borders of the empire, [their leaders] were granted caps and belts [as marks of official authority], and seven new counties were opened up and established.
Then Lü Bu combined forces with Han Xian and Yang Feng,and they all headed for Shouchun, advancing by land and [220]water as far as Zhongli, and plundering as they passed. They turnedback north of the Huai, leaving a letter in insult to Yuan Shu.
Cao Cao had intended to give his daughter in marriage to Ding Yi, but because Ding Yi had only one eye, Cao Pi objected and prevented it.
Now Zibu [Zhang Zhao] is a worthy man. If I can use him, will his achievements and reputation show credit on anyone but me?"
The eight kingdoms of Qi, Beihai, Fuling, Xiapi, Changshan, Ganling, Jiyin [for Jibei] and Pingyuan were all abolished.
Secretly, however, Jia Xu planned to join Zhang Xiu. Someone said,"Duan Wei treats you generously, why should you leave?"
Liu Bei travelled north from Jiangzhou along the Dianjiang River toFu.
Zhang Yang, Administrator of Henei, was an old friend of Lü Buand wanted to come to his relief. He could not manage this but hebrought out his men to make a diversion in his support at Dongshi.
Kong Rong said to Xun Yu, "Yuan Shao's lands are broad and histroops are strong. Tian Feng and Xu You are wise men to plan forhim, Shen Pei and Pang Ji are loyal ministers to act in his affairs,Yan Liang and Wen Chou are brave generals to command histroops. Here are serious problems."
He collected his troops to face the passes, but no fighting took place.
Everyone was pleased for Yan Jun, but he firmly refused the appointment, saying, "I am a simple scholar, with no experience of military affairs." He spoke with the utmost sincerity and even wept.
At this time all the palaces and houses had been burnt, and the officials had to clear away thorns to live among the walls.
The Supervisor of the Secretariat Mao Jie said, "Some while ago, Yuan Shao made no distinction between the sons of the legal wife and of the concubine. He overturned his clan and destroyed his state. To set aside the heir is a matter of great moment.
All wept and said, "Your Excellency had no cause to quarrel with Yuan, and now you have come to this distress for the sake of an official appointed by our emperor. We are your people. How can we abandon you?"
Li Xian memorialised in turn, "I observe that the Virtuous Empress Dou of Emperor Zhang ill-treated and brought the death of [the Lady Liang, who was posthumously honoured as] the Respectful and Remembered Empress. And the family of the Thoughtful Empress Yan of Emperor An was wicked, treacherous and rebellious. Yet Emperor He never had any intention of arranging a separate tomb [for the Empress Dou], and the court of Emperor Shun entertained no proposal for the demotion [of the Empress Yan].
Yuan Shao's follower Pang Ji said to Yuan Shao, "You have undertaken a great work, but you are still dependent upon others for subsidy and supplies. Unless you take a province for yourself, you will never be able to act independently."
Ten thousand men with one idea in their minds would be too much to handle, and we have a hundred thousand to deal with!
In the intercalary month Cao Cao went north from the TongPass to cross the Yellow River.
He ordered the Palace Internuncios to guard the Southern Palace, barring the gates and closing the Covered Way.
Once again, Li Fu led his three horsemen. Dressed like the peoplesurrendering, they went with them and disappeared into the dark. Sothey broke through the siege-lines and made their escape.
If instead we press him too hard, Sun Quan will change his plans and turn against us. His majesty the king will certainly give deep thought to this question."
This is the accord of Heaven and Man, differing voices sounding in harmony. Your majesty should accept the great position. How can you hesitate?"
Without Yang Feng, Han Xian was isolated. Accompanied by afew score horsemen, he sought to go back to Bing province, but hewas killed by Zhang Xuan the magistrate of Shuqiu.
When ten years and more had passed, Liang Ji was destroyed, and then Li Xie told the whole story to the keeper of the wine shop.The wine-shop keeper prepared carriages [and baggage] to give him a most generous farewell present, but Li Xie refused to accept.Returning to his native place, he now carried out the mourning ceremonies and put on funeral clothes.When brother and sister met, their sadness touched all who were present.
His younger cousin Cao Hong gave his horse to Cao Cao, but Cao Cao would not accept.
Guan Jing sighed and said, "Had I not persuaded the general tostay here, he might have saved himself.
Sun Ce clapped his hands and laughed, and it was then that hedecided to take over Yuzhang.
Xu Qiu, former Administrator of Guangling, obtained the GreatSeal of State and sent it to the emperor.
Jing Gu, son of the Imperial Clerk Jing Yi, had become a pupil of Li Ying, but had not [at that stage] registered his name.As a result, he was not affected by the proscription. Jing Yi, however, said with a sigh, "I regarded Li Ying as a worthy man and sent my son to study with him. How can I avoid responsibility just because he failed to register his name?"
When Lü Meng reached Xunyang, he hid his best troops in barges and had men in plain clothes rowing, so they looked like merchants. Travelling day and night,
Now a gang of concubines and eunuchs have combined to dominate the court, and they cheat and deceive your celestial intelligence."Moreover, a horde of petty fellows have been gathered at the Gate of the Vast Capital. They compose rhapsodies and stories, and they are favoured by the common people. They recommend and urge one another forward, and within a few weeks or a month each of them receives promotion.
In the eleventh month on the day renzi [10 Jan 166] there was a fire in the Northern Office of the Yellow Gates.
After several days he asked to see CaoCao and said, "Yang Biao has been examined and makes no change in his statement. This man is known within all the four seas. If youpunish him without firm evidence of his guilt, you will certainlylose many people's affections. In my humble opinion, you shouldreconsider the matter."
Cao Cao called Guo Jia to audience and discussed affairs with him. He was pleased and said, "This is certainly a man who can help me gain the empire." As Guo Jia went out he too was pleased and said, "This is the master for me."
So the king made excuses to themessengers from Liaodong, and he disbanded the cavalry that hehad prepared for Yuan Tan.
He held a great banquet, raised a toast to Xu Huang and said, "It was your good work that saved Fan and Xiangyang."
"I did not leave my native country and come to join you because of my family's position, but because I want to help in the work of the world.
If Xun Yu had left Emperor Wu of Wei [Cao Cao],22 whom should hehave served?
When the officers in Xu city heard Yuan Shao was coming, theywere all afraid.
He pays small attention to superficial matters, but his government keeps the people at peace. I beg your lordship to think again."
Gongsun Zan built a small fort in the southeast of Ji city and went to live there.
butif you take them while they are squabbling then the whole empirecan be settled.
"Lord Cao's camp is strong," argued Zhang He. "If we attack itwe shall certainly not succeed.
Li Jue and the others agreed. They made covenant together, and led their forces, several thousand men, marching westwards day and night.
Dong Zhuo said to Yuan Shao, "The master of the empire should be a man of worth and wisdom: whenever I think of Emperor Ling, I become angry. Lord Dong [Liu Xie the King of Chenliu] seems possible. If I give him the throne, however, would he be any better than Lord Shi [the current emperor Liu Bian]?
however, he browbeat and ridiculed him. Claiming that he wished to inspect the regalia, he borrowed the imperial [144] credentials and the Staff of Authority from Ma Midi, then kept them by force and refused to hand them back. He ordered a dozen of his men to bully Ma Midi so that he would be compelled to give him higher office.
The mother of Xu Shu was captured by Cao Cao, and Xu Shu made his excuses to Liu Bei. Pointing to his breast, he said, "In the beginning, the reason I sought to plan with you for the hegemony was because of this square inch of territory [the heart].
but he had no personal authority and no ability in military planning, so the Qiang made continual incursions and they overran and destroyed camps and defence points.They formed an alliance to attack all the commanderies of the region, and their raids became increasingly destructive.
Zhang Fei shouted at Yan Yan MWhen a great army comes, why do you not surrender? How dare you fight against us?"
If you want something foryourself, you can rise up and take advantage of their difficulties.Even if you have no ambitions of your own, you should certainlychoose one of them to follow.
Tanshihuai ordered the chieftains of his three divisions to gather their forces and intercept them. Xia Yu and the others were totally defeated. Having lost all their insignia and their baggage, each of them made their escape with only a few dozen horsemen. Seventy or eighty percent of the Chinese troops died.
Yuan Shu asked provisions from Chen, but Luo Jun refused.Furious, Yuan Shu sent retainers to kill Liu Chong and Luo Jun bytreachery. So the state of Chen was destroyed.
Jia Kui, held out in Jiang. GuoYuan attacked it fiercely, and when the city was about to fall someelders made an agreement with him that they would surrender if hepromised not to harm Jia Kui. Guo Yuan agreed.
I gave them favourable words andpromises, and the reason I seemed to accept their proposals was tohave them feel at ease and make no preparations. Then we collectedour forces, and the day we attacked them it was like 'when suddenthunder comes there is no time to cover the ears'.
"These are the reasons you should follow him," explained JiaXu. "
"When the Director of the Secretariat Chen Fan has authority in the manage-ment of affairs," explained Yuan Yan, "then there is good government. When the Regular Attendants and Yellow Gates officials are allowed to take part in administration, then there is disorder.
In the ninth month the Minister of the Household Zhou Jing became Grand Commandant.
Then Liu Bei sent his adopted son Liu Feng to follow the Mian River down from Hanzhong and take command of Meng Da's army to make a combined attack on Shangyong.The Administrator of Shangyong, Shen Dan, surrendered with all his commandery.
"Yuan Shao is slow and hesitant," observed Guo Jia. "He willnot come quickly.
"but what concerns me is that YuanShao may make trouble in the lands within the passes. If he stirs upthe Qiang and other barbarians in the west, and urges on Shu andHan in the south, then I shall be facing five-sixths of the empirewith only Yan province and Yu.
If you will delay the tax just alittle, I can solve the problem for you."
Sun Ce then crossed the Yangzi and fought one battle after another. All who faced him were defeated and none dared match themselves against him.
In the twelfth month Duke Cao ofWEI arrived at Mengjin.
The emperor was furious and wanted to depose the empress, but the eunuchs spoke on her behalf and dissuaded him.
Yang Ci replied, "The Apocrypha of the Spring and Autumn Annals say: 'When Heaven sends a rainbow, all the world is angry and all within the seas is in confusion.'
Once before, when Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu were controllers of divisions on the left and right, they led soldiers to attack Jiangling. Zhou Yu had the deciding voice, but Cheng Pu shared command because of his seniority. They frequently disagreed, and they almost ruined the affairs of our state. Let this be a warning to us.
The emperor was extremely angry. He summoned Cheng Jin and Liu Zhi and sent them both to jail.
The eunuch leaders took He Jin's head and tossed it to them: "He Jin planned to rebel; he has been executed."
Li Jue often invited Guo Si to drink, and sometimes kept him to stay overnight.
Cao Cao arrested Kong Rong and killed him, together with his wife and children.
Gao Rou, a Junior Clerk in the Department of Granaries,objected, "If a major force goes west, Han Sui and Ma Chao willsuspect we intend to attack them, and they will join together todefend themselves.
Later Lü Bu became less favourable to him, and because WeiXu was a close relative he took Gao Shun's men and gave them toWei Xu.
Nanlou of Shanggu, a chieftain of the Wuhuan, had a following of more than nine thousand luo groups. Qiuliju of Liaoxi had a following of five thousand groups. Both men took title as kings.
Liu Biao, furious, called him a traitor. Calling a full assemblyof his officials, he drew up soldiers, took his Staff of Authority andintended to execute him.
Before this, though Li Ying and his colleagues had been dismissed and proscribed from office [in 167],all the scholars and gentlemen of the empire paid the highest respect to their conduct and cast all blame upon the court. They sought anxiously to emulate them, and were only concerned that they might fail to match their fine example. Then people got together to publish lists which allocated titles [to the distinguished men of the empire]:Dou Wu, Chen Fan and Liu Shu were the Three Lords: "lord"describes a person whose example the whole world might follow.Li Ying, Xun Yi, Du Mi, Wang Chang, Liu You, Wei Lang, Zhao Dian and Zhu Yu were the Eight Heroes: "hero" means a courageous man.Guo Tai, Fan Pang, Yin Xun and Ba Su, together with Zong Ci of Nanyang, Xia Fu of Chenliu, Cai Yan of Runan and Yang Zhi of Taishan, were the Eight Exemplars: "exemplar" means a person who is able to influence others by his virtuous conduct.Zhang Jian, Zhai Chao, Cen Zhi and Yuan Kang, together with Liu Biao of Shanyang, Chen Xiang of Runan, Kong Yu of Lu kingdom and Tan Fu of Shanyang, were the Eight Guides: "guide" means a person who is able to lead others to follow those of good example.Du Shang, together with Zhang Miao and Wang Xiao of Dongping, Liu Ru of Dong commandery, Humu Ban of Taishan, Qin Zhou of Chenliu, Pi Xiang of Lu kingdom and Wang Zhang of Donglai, were the Eight Treasurers: "treasurer" means a person who is able to rescue people by means of his wealth.
Then Wei Gu planned a great levy of troops. Du Ji was con cerned, but said to him, "Such a large-scale recruitment will surelymake the people uneasy. Far better raise troops gradually, and paythem wages.
Chen Gui, however, replied, "General Cao is restoring law and order, and will disperseand pacify cruelty and evil. In my opinion [217] you should assisthim, and think only how to help the house of Han.
Liu Hong was a great-grandson of the Filial King of Hejian. His grandfather Liu Shu and his father Liu Chang had held the fief of Jiedu Village in succession.
Soon afterwards Zhang Wen sent me to attack the rebel Xianlian Qiang. I knew we would have no success, but I could not avoid the duty, and so we marched."I left the Senior Major Liu Jing, with four thousand horse and foot, to camp in Anding as a show of strength.
In the second month on the day wuyin [10 Mar] the high officials recommended that a Palace of Prolonged Autumn be established.
"I was still young at that time. I built a fine house fifty li east ofQiao,11 and I proposed to read books in autumn and summer, andshoot and hunt in winter and spring. That was my plan for twentyyears: to wait until the empire was reformed, then come out fromretirement to accept some appointment.
Sun Quan sent Zhuge Jin in an embassy of reply, and they renewed their covenant of goodwill.
Cao Cao sent the Director of Retainers Zhong Yao to besiege theSouthern Shanyu at Pingyang, but the relief [Guo Yuan] arrivedbefore they could capture the place.
6: 183 AD
"Moreover, in ancient times when the ruler was taking gentlemen into his service, each feudal lord was required to send one man each year.
When the orchestra was ready Liu Biao wished to hold audience tohear it.
Cao Cao went to see Xu Shao and asked him, "What sort of a person am I?"
Within a few weeks Cao Cao's supplies will be exhausted.Attack him then and you can defeat him."
So he led his soldiers west, intending to occupy Chenggao, and Zhang Miao sent his officer Wei Zi with a detachment of troops to follow him.
How much more isthis true of fighting against Cao Cao. Yet you claim there is no goodcause!
Leading out his army, he camped at the Pan River,sent a memorial to the court listing Yuan Shao's crimes and wrongdoings, and brought his men forward to attack him.
The Bobo bandits ravaged Hedong. Dong Zhuo sent his officer Niu Fu to attack them.
If you share it with the common people, it will be no harm to the government."
Then Lü Meng took Lu Su's place and camped at Lukou.48 He believed that Guan Yu had always been an brave fighting man, and that he was intending to take over all the territory. He already controlled the upper reaches of the state,49 and this situation could not be maintained for long.He therefore spoke secretly to Sun Quan, "Order the General Who Subdues the Caitiffs [Sun Jiao] to hold Nan commandery, Pan Zhang to go to Bodi, and send Jiang Qin with ten thousand soldiers raiding up and down the Yangzi, to harass the enemy wherever heturns. Then I shall go forward and occupy Xiangyang for our state. After that, what have we to fear from Cao Cao? And why should we rely upon Guan Yu?"
Cao Cao was at Xu city, and was planning to receive [194] the emperor.
Following this, the Director of Retainers Han Yan sent in memorials on the crimes and wrongdoing of Zuo Guan. In addition, he called evidence from their native province and commandery that [Zuo Guan's] elder brother, the Minister Coachman and Marquis of Nan District Zuo Cheng,18 had accepted and offered special favours and had taken bribes and received contributions for wrongful purposes. Their retainers, moreover, had acted lawlessly and had bullied and abused the local officials and the common people.
The Minister of the Guards Dong Zhong, Marquis of Tiao, was appointed General of Agile Cavalry.
The Excellency of Works Chen Dan left office. The Minister of Ceremonies Lai Yan became Excellency of Works.
Worried by this, the emperor sent the Palace Attendant Liu Ai to say to the General Who Proclaims Righteousness Jia Xu, "As a loyal officer, you have been honoured and favoured by his majesty. Now the Qiang and other barbarians are everywhere. You must do something."
Shen Peifought them in the streets, but Cao Cao's men captured him alive.
"A people who have shown themselves so loyal to us and so valuable would not rebel without good cause.
In the summer in the fourth month the Minister of Ceremonies Lai Yan of Nanyang became Excellency of Works.
Liu Qi was worried. He asked Zhuge Liang for advice as to how he might secure his position, but Zhuge Liang refused to answer.
In the summer, in the fifth month on the day jiaxu [2 Jul], there was a landslide in Hanzhong commandery.
"Liu Zhi the Administrator of Taiyuan and Cheng Jin the Administrator of Nanyang have the ambition to eliminate evil and wickedness, and the punishments they carried out fulfilled the hopes of the people.
Zhang Zhao acted as head of the whole administration. Abovehe reported to the court, and below he gave orders to the cities,while the army commanders were all instructed to maintain theirpositions.
Dong Zhuo's chariot was adorned like an emperor's. Dong Zhuo would summon the officials of the Three Terraces, Masters of Writing and below, and all went to his offices to report or receive instructions.
Before this, Liu Xu had been kidnapped by the Yellow Turbans, and the people of his kingdom paid a ransom to get him back. The court was of the opinion that he should be restored to his kingdom,
Kebineng, chieftain of the Xianbi, had come with several ten thousand cavalry to watch events. He saw Cao Zhang's might in battle, and how those who faced him were all destroyed. He asked to submit, and so all the north was pacified.
"Quite easily," replied Jia Xu.
More than three hundred of [Liang Ji's] former subordinates and clients were dismissed.The court was empty.
"Furthermore, if allies attack one another without good reason, we are giving Cao Cao a lever and allow the enemy to take advan tage from our quarrel. This is not a far-sighted plan.
Yuan Shao repeated Geng Bao's suggestion to his officers incouncil,
When Liu Bei was young he had become good friends with Guan Yu of Hedong and Zhang Fei of Zhuo commandery. He made Guan Yu and Zhang Fei Majors with Separate Commands and shared his troops with them.
Yuan Shang led an attack on Yuan Tan and completely defeatedhim.
Liu Bei made plans with Dong Cheng, with the Colonel of theChang River Regiment Chong Ji and the generals Wu Zilan andWang Fu.
Before this, Duke Cao of WEI had pursued Ma Chao to Anding, butthen he heard that Tian Yin and Su Bo had rebelled, and he drew offhis army and went back.
"When you were chief in Yan province before, you settled the disturbances east of the mountains and so the people turned to you and were glad to accept your rule.
The emperor took his advice. Cao Qian was appointed Administrator and an edict was proclaimed to grant an amnesty. All the people came at once to submit.
One day, in casual conversation with his Palace Attendant Yuan Yan of Chenliu,the emperor asked, "What sort of a ruler am I?"
Liu Bei asked to surrender to Lü Bu. Lü Bu had quarrelled again with Yuan Shu because the supplies for his army had not been maintained, so he called Liu Bei and restored him to his position as Inspector of Yu province. They joined forces against Yuan Shu, and Lü Bu sent Liu Bei to camp at Xiaopei.
When Sun Ce had captured Huan city he looked after YuanShu's family, and when he entered Yuzhang he collected Liu Yao'scoffin and treated his family well. Gentlemen and scholars praisedhim for it.
He went first to Guo Si, and Guo Si accepted the message.Then he went to Li Jue but Li Jue refused, saying, "Guo Duo is nothing but a horse-thieving brigand. How dare he seek to rank with me?
Lu Bu's officers Xue Lan and Li Feng were camped at Juye, and Cao Cao attacked them. Lu Bu went to aid Xue Lan, but he failed to break through and was compelled to retreat. Cao Cao cut off the heads of Xue Lan and his followers.
When Yang Qiu received this urgent summons, he went to the emperor and said, "Though I am not a man of pure and lofty conduct, I bear general responsibility to act as a dog or a kite [in cleaning up the work of evildoers]. I have so far put to death Wang Fu and Duan Jiong, but they were of small account, no more than foxes, and that is not an achievement to show the empire.
Yuan Shu was embarrassed, and he immediately sent up supplies for the army.
"And there are some who have never set brush to paper on any official document, and who do not understand the art of rhetoric, but get other people to compose on their behalf. They corrupt and cheat all proper procedures; yet each receives your imperial favour. They are false as an empty cicada skin, fallen in the dirt.
In the winter, in the tenth month the Excellency over the Masses Yuan Wei left office.In the eleventh month on the day bingx-u [17 Dec?], the Household Counsellor Yang Ci became Excellency over the Masses.
The Excellency over the Masses Hu Guang was made Grand Tutor with control of the Secretariat.The Excellency of Works Liu Chong became Excellency over the Masses and the Minister Herald Xu Xu became Excellency of Works.
When the Yellow Turbans rebelled [in 184] he took command of his own forces and the people of the kingdomfeared him and did not dare to [223] rebel.
You need only follow the road of humanity and justice and the people will turn to you like water hurrying downwards. Why need you worry whether soldiers may rally to you?"
"Then came the trouble with Dong Zhuo, and I raised loyaltroops.
Zhang He retreated to Nanzheng, and Liu Bei went back to Chengdu.
In the twelfth month the Minister of the Guards Zhou Jing became Excellency of Works.
When the emperor asked them the reason, they would kowtow and say, "We are afraid of Director Li."
"To plan a campaign, moreover, requires more than a simplecount of numbers.
People sang and danced in the streets, and the shops in the city were filled with men and women selling pearls and jade, dresses and clothing, to buy wine and meat for celebration.
"Gongjin's advice is right," added the Lady Wu.
At this time Yang Qiu was out on a tour of inspection of the imperial tombs. Without waiting for the official instructions to be prepared, Cao Jie had the Director of the Secretariat summon him to his new appointment.
As Ma Midi's body was brought back to the capital,45 the assembledcourt intended to grant him additional honours.
So Zhang Yang endorsed Cao Cao's memorial and forwarded it to the capital,
Li Gao sought to arrest Su Buwei but could not find him. Frustrated and furious, he spat blood and died.
but Han Fu was still anxious and afraid. Seeking Yuan Shao's permission to leave, he went to stay with Zhang Miao.
Becoming frightened, he abandoned his seal and ribbon of office and fled. When he reached Pingyuan he killed himself.
King Qiao asked Qian Zhao, "Once before, Lord Yuan said thathe held command from the Son of Heaven to appoint me Shanyu.Now Lord Cao is saying that he will tell the Son of Heaven andhave me made Shanyu properly. And besides this, there is an envoywith insignia from Liaodong.
When the Xiongnu and the Wuhuan heard that Zhang Huan was coming, they all came to surrender, two hundred thousand people altogether.
I beg now to carry out this duty, and I ask that your majesty grant pardon for their lives to my brothers, and permit my family to retain some part of our inheritance. This would redound to your broad and generous humanity.
He had already prepared a chariot with an escort of cavalry, but Tian Chou said, "The roads are blocked and there are robbers and bandits everywhere. If you give me an official commission, everyone will notice me.
When Ni Heng abused Cao Cao, however, Cao Cao was angryand said to Kong Rong, "Ni Heng is a fool, and I should kill himlike a small bird or a rat. I believe, however, though it is quiteundeserved, that this fellow has gained some reputation. If I killhim, people everywhere will say I lack tolerance."
Yuan Shu had sent Sun Jian to attack Dong Zhuo, but before he returned Yuan Shao appointed Zhou Ang of Kuaiji as Inspector of Yu province, and Zhou Ang attacked and captured Sun Jian's basecamp at Yangcheng.
While the great affair is yet not settled, it is my duty to seek good servants for you. Could I conceal a worthy man just because of a private quarrel?"
Embarrassed and ashamed, the Masters of Writing returned to their work.
In the winter, in the tenth month Cao Cao was appointed Governor of Yan province.
On one occasion Jiang Gong and his brother Jijiang were travelling to the commandery capital [of Pengcheng] and at night on the road they were captured by bandits.The bandits were going to kill them, but Jiang Gong said, "My brother is still young, the apple of his parents' eyes, and he is not yet betrothed. Please kill me and let him go."
and the Excellency over the Masses Chen Dan sent in a memorial: "The Excellency and the Minister bias their reports, whether of praise or blame, to favour their own faction. This is like setting loose the kite and caging the phoenix."
When a man must establish a royal work, said Fei Shi, "he cannot use just one comrade.
The general [Cao Cao] knows me well, but he keeps pressing me like this. I assure you, I would rather cut my throat."
and King Cao of WEI was even thinking of shifting the capital from Xu city to avoid his attacks.Sima Yi, however, Major to the Army of the Chancellor, and the Junior Clerk in the Department of the West Jiang Ji both said to him, "Yu Jin and his comrades were destroyed by floods, they were not defeated in battle, and there not yet any real damage to the great plans of our state.
The Administrator of Nanyang is Cen Gongxiao, Cheng Jin of Hongnong has only to sit and sing.
He had chain pumps and a thirsty crow set up at the west of the bridge, to spray water down the north-south roads of the suburbs. The emperor planned that this should save his people the expense of scattering water to lay the dust.
When all those who contest him in wisdom are exhausted, and when all those who compete with him by force have been defeated, then they come to a situation where they can no longer resist him and their strength can no longer match his. Then at last they bow their heads and bend their necks and accept his yoke.
Though the ruler of Chu offered rewards for Wu Yun, and [Emperor Gao of] Han pursued Ji Bu;49 neither were so fierce as this.
The Banshun barbarians raided and plundered Ba commandery. Campaigns had been sent against them year after year, but they had not been subdued.
Then Yan province wassettled, and Xu Xi and Mao Hui fled to Zang Ba.
When the feast was ended he ordered his own carriage to wait, while Zhou Tai went with an escort of foot-soldiers and horsemen, beating drums and blowing horns to make a fanfare as he left.
Next day, he saw Sun Shao andappointed him Colonel Who Upholds Courage with command of allhis father's troops.
Guo Tai made skilled judgements of individual moral conduct, but he never engaged in controversial discussion of affairs of state. For this reason, though he lived in turbulent and corrupt times, peril and misfortune did not reach him.
Zhang Mancheng had been camped in the vicinity of Wan for some three months,
When Yuan Shao was in Henei Zhang Yang went to join him, and he camped with the Southern Shanyu Yufuluo by the Zhang River.
Cao Cao spoke with his ministers, and all agreed he should keep it secret.
If you chase him too anxiously, however, the situation will certainly change.
Sun Quan brought Zhou Yu to discuss the matter with hismother the Lady Wu. Zhou Yu said, "In ancient times, when Chuwas first established as a vassal state [of the Zhou dynasty], it hadnot so much as a hundred li of territory.
Yanxi 延熹 8: 165 AD
This is a chance from Heaven. You must not let it pass!"
He should be sober and anxious, but instead he rejoices. How can this last long?
At this time an edict sent the messenger Duan Xun to grant Liu Yu a larger fief, with command over six provinces. Gongsun Zan was made General of the Van and Marquis of Yi.
In the spring, in the second month Wang Guo's army was discouraged and exhausted. As he raised the siege and set off, Huangfu Song sent his men to attack him.
He whispered to Jia Xu, "What do we do now?"
Now they arerivals for power, and each has his own party.
The magistrate of Kaocheng, Wang Huan of Henei, appointed Qiu Xiang as his Registrar, and said to him, "I have heard that when you were at Pu village, you, did not punish Chen Yuan but reformed. You seem to have been reluctant to act as an eagle or a hawk."
If you give aid to the Son of Heaven above, then you playthe part of Duke Huan and Duke Wen. For next best you couldemulate Dou Rong, and you will never lack for wealth or honour.
But just as Zhang Wen could not use my advice, so Zhou Shen could not use Sun Jian's, and in the end they were defeated and turned back.
but the Inspector Liang Gu was frightened and thought of killing Su Zhenghe in order to avoid the responsibility [of impeaching such a high official]. He asked the advice of the Chief Clerk of Hanyang, He Xun of Dunhuang. Su Zhenghe had once done He Xun a bad turn,
Xia Fu's younger brother Xia Jing took silken cloth to search for him and take supplies. Xia Fu refused to accept the offerings, saying, "How can you seek to offer gifts to one who would bring you misfortune?"
Sun Ce ordered Taishi Ci to go and settle them, and said to him,"Governor Liu always resented the fact that I attacked Lujiang forYuan Shu.
Liu Chong had formerly been Administrator of Kuaiji.He cleared away all vexatious and cruel measures, he prohibited and checked all that was unlawful, so the commandery became extremely well ordered.Then he was summoned to the capital, to become Court Architect.
He was always afraid of Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi, explained Cao Cao. "If I had put pressure on them they would naturally have joined forces, but when I eased it they were sure to betray one another. That is all there was to it."
If his wife or one of his children did something wrong, he would take off his hat to admonish himself [for his failure in teaching or guidance]. His wife or child would stand down in the courtyard to apologise or repent for the misdeed, Qiu Xiang would put his hat on again, and only then would the culprit venture to return once more to the dais. At no time did Qiu Xiang show any change of expression for pleasure or anger.
In the eighth month Cao Cao went east to deal with the pirate Guan Cheng. When he came to Chunyu, he sent his officers Yue Jin and Li Dian to attack Guan Cheng. They defeated him and Guan Cheng fled to islands in the sea.
Since the time of the three dynasties, the beauty of Teaching and Custom had never reached to the bloom of Eastern Han.
An edict ordered the Palace Attendants and the Masters of Writing to proclaim to Yang Ding and his fellows that they should make peace with Duan Wei. Yang Ding and the others accepted the command and went back to their camps.
This is the time to take him.
Shi Bi replied, "The former kings established the proper bounds of the empire, and drew borders to define each territory. Just as different regions have different geography, so local customs are not the same.
If you now, without good reason, make plans to abandon the temples of the imperial clan and to leave the imperial tombs, then I am afraid the people will tremble in fear and there will surely be confusion like a boiling broth.
LüBu brought out his forces against Cao Cao several times, but he was heavily defeated in one battle after another. He went back to holdthe city [of Xiapi] and did not dare come out again.
Before this, the Regular Attendant Zhang Rang had a slave supervisor, who was responsible for all the affairs of his household and had great influence and power.
Jian'an 16: 211 AD
[In the third month] on the day gengyin [11 Apr]3 an edict combinedthe fourteen provinces to make nine again.
He wept and said, "When my late father came from Changsha to attack Dong Zhuo, he joined you at Nanyang, made alliance with you and became your friend. Through ill fortune he met with death, and his good work remained unfinished.
Since the moment I came here, however, I have heard no praise for any good man, but on the contrary you give support to the wrong-doers.This is not the sort of request I had hoped to hear from you."
The Empress Song was not receiving the emperor's favours. Many of the concubines in the harem, benefiting from their own good fortune, combined to slander and injure her.
Jia Xu went to call upon Liu Biao, and wastreated as an honoured guest.
Cui Yan obtained the manuscript of Yang Xurfs memorial, read it through, and then wrote to him, nI have examined your memorial and it is excellent.
In the fifth month the Steward of the Palace of Perpetual Joy Fan Ling of Nanyang became Grand Commandant.In the sixth month he left office.
When he is destroyed, Zhang Fei will be forced to retreat."
Yuan Shao had plannedto appoint him his successor, but had not made any formalannouncement.
Paying no attention, Dian Wei said to his men, "When the enemy are ten paces away, report it."
The Dowager Dou was transferred to the Southern Palace,and the [surviving] dependents of Dou Wu's family were exiled to Rinan.All officials, from the excellencies and ministers downwards, who had been recommended by Chen Fan and Dou Wu or who had been their former officers and students, were now dismissed and proscribed from office.
It was the gentle government of the Ancient Duke and the Lord of the West that attracted all the empire;would they have needed to send carts laden with gold, and carriages of treasure, as a favour to the people?
Furthermore, you will be taking over from the weak andattacking the stupid, and what you seize by rebellion you may holdwith obedience. Men of the past have always respected this.
They were all very grateful, and asked what they could do in return. ,
The province at that time controlled only Jiujiang, but LiuFu rode alone to the empty city of Hefei and set his provincial head quarters there. He called Mei [293] Qian, Lei Xu and the others tojoin him, and they all sent tribute and accepted alliance.
In the winter, in the tenth month, the Minister of Ceremonies Chen Dan became Excellency over the Masses.
Following this initiative, the Prefect of the Yellow Gates Dong Meng spoke on several occasions about the injustices suffered by the Dowager. The emperor was deeply affected by his arguments,and gave her increasing quantities of supplies and provisions.
Zhang Huan and his colleagues bound themselves and reported to the Ministry of Justice. After a few days, they were set free, having each bought remission of sentence by payment of three month's salary.
I shall deal first with Yuan Shao, then send troops against Liu Dai."
Han Fu and Yuan Shao wrote to Yuan Shu to say, "The emperor is not a true son of Xiao-Ling.3 We want to act like [the Marquis of] Jiang and Guan [Ying] in former times, when they punished and deposed a puppet ruler, and welcomed the King of Dai to his place. 4 We plan to set up the Grand Marshal Liu Yu as Emperor."
In the winter, in the tenth month on the day renshen [3 Nov] the emperor paid a visit to Chang'an.
then it is like the time that a unicorn appeared in the Chunqiu period when it should not have done so. Confucius recorded that as something extraordinary [and ominous].
Realising that Zhang Lu meant well, he sent messengers to put his mind at ease.
Tian Yu of Yuyang said to his Administrator Xianyu Fu, "Cao Caosupports the Son of Heaven and so commands the lords.
As they returned, however, Jia Xu was on the city wall and hesaid to Zhang Xiu, "Go back after him at once. If you fight this timeyou are sure to win."
The emperor did not take the matter seriously, and just at that time an edict commissioned Liu Tao to write a commentary, the Chunqiu tiaoli, on the Spring and Autumn Annals.
When Chen Fan and Dou Wu came to power, Li Ying and the others were chosen once more for office, but when their patrons were destroyed they were again dismissed.
The General Who Inspires Awe Cheng Yu was at Juancheng [274]with a garrison of seven hundred men.
yet a ruler of royal power can be appealed to for justice.I ask you to speak on their behalf."
The Deputy Director of the Secretariat He Kui and the Junior Clerk in the Department of the East, Xu Yi of Dongguan, were the only ones who would not acknowledge Ding Yi's authority. Then Ding Yi spoke against Xu Yi, and Xu Yi left the court to become Administrator of Wei commandery. It was only through intercession from Huan Jie that he escaped serious punishment.
so Qian Zhao went east to Cao Cao, andCao Cao re-appointed him as an Assistant Officer of Ji province.
In the second month on the day renwu [4 Mar] there was an amnesty for the empire.
They had a letter from Dong Zhuo [ordering his arrest] but only the Officer of Merit recognised him. He thought it wrong that one of the leading men in the empire should be imprisoned when the world was in such disorder, so he advised the magistrate to release him
At this time [the territories of] Yuan Shao, Cao Cao andGongsun Zan formed a continuous line. Kung Rong's forces wereweak and he had few supplies, he occupied an isolated corner andhad no communication with any of them.
There was respect and good feeling among the troops, and regulations were well maintained.
Jia Xu said, "I suggest you pay attention to themeasure of your virtue, observe the manners of a simple scholar, bediligent day and night, and do not offend against the proper conduct of a son. That is all."
Liu Bei collected troops, and gained over ten thousand men. Lü Buwas concerned at this and he in turn now led soldiers against LiuBei.
"The people ofYi province have recently suffered warfare. You must return their fields and houses to them, and order them to live in peace and renew their occupations. Later, you can get labour- service and taxes from them, and you will gain their affection, but you should not rob them now to give presents to your favourites."
When he held the victory feast for his officers, Gan Ning came before his mat and kowtowed. His blood and tears flowed together, and he said to Sun Quan, "Su Fei showed me favour in the past. Had it not been for him I would now be neglected bones in a ditch, and I could never have come under your standard.
In considerable anxiety and distress, Shan Kuang gave money to his retainer Ren Fang to kill Wei Yu.
In the winter, in the tenth month Zheng Li was arrested and sent to the Prison of the Northern Office [of the Yellow Gates], and it was arranged that the Director of the Imperial Secretariat Lian Zhong should make false complaint to the throne that "Zheng Li and his fellows have planned to receive Liu Kui and establish him as emperor. This is greatly refractory and impious."As a result of this, an imperial edict ordered the Inspector of Ji province to arrest Liu Kui and examine him for the truth of the matter. Liu Kui was reprimanded and put under great pressure, and was ordered to commit suicide. His eleven concubines, seventy sons and daughters, and twenty-four serving-maids died in prison. The Tutor and the Chancellor and lower officials [of the kingdom of Bohai], all suffered execution.
Our forces now are few and isolated, and it is not easy for us to go forward. We shall wait a while, until the commandery levies have all arrived, and then we may resume the advance with combined forces."
About this time White Rider [Zhang Cheng]23 attacked Yuan[county in He]dong, and Gao Gan entered Huoze.
Jin Yun wept and said, "I do not dare to have a double heart [and act unfaithfully]."
All his officers argued, "You should invite him to join you, so that together you may attack stronger enemies." Cao Cao laid his sword across his knee, coloured up, and refused to listen.
At this time the enfeoffments and rewards were passing all bounds, and the harem favourites of the emperor were becoming more and more numerous.
The army followed their master, and that was all. If we claim that they were wicked and rebellious, then pardon them, I am afraid they will just become more uncertain. That is not the way to settle them."
An edict called for the sons and younger brothers of excellencies, ministers and lower officials to be appointed as Gentlemen, replacing eunuchs in attendance at the palace.
The remnant rebels of Jiuzhen had established a camp in Rinan, and their forces were growing steadily stronger.An imperial edict reappointed the Administrator of Guiyang, Xia Fang, to be Inspector of Jiaozhi.
If I leave now he will certainly be pleased, and since he will hope I maynegotiate a good alliance for him outside he will treat my wife andchildren kindly.
Day and night the excellencies and other high ministers sent personal followers to ask after their illnesses, and junior officials gathered in crowds outside their gates; but they would see only a few of them.
If we bring an army to attack Li Jue and his fellows, and join with the east of the mountains, we can turn ill fortune into good."
She went out to greethim, bowed once, then called, "Gentlemen, show yourselves!" SunGao and Fu Ying came out together and killed Gui Lan, and theother men went and killed Dai Yuan
Zhuge Liang said to Liu Bei, "The matter is now urgent. Please give me authority to seek help from General Sun."
Liu Bei made his rebellion just a short time ago,so he cannot have his troops under full control. If you movepromptly you are sure to defeat him."
Furthermore, the Long River [the Yangzi] is your critical line of defence against him,
Tossing the cup aside, he got up and went out to the cage cart.
In the spring, in the first month the Excellency over the Masses Zhao Wen recommended Cao Cao's son Cao Pi for office.
Next day, when Yuan Shao learnt that Lü Bu was still alive, he was so frightened that he closed the gates of the city to protect himself.
Lu Su also toldZhuge Liang, "I am a friend of Ziyu,"
Moreover, the people of this commandery have held loyal, and evenin time of danger they have never been uncertain. I believe the stateshould be showing some consideration, but we still impose the silktax. What sort of encouragement is that?"
Now that Cao Cao's army isretreating, his men will be thinking of going back to their homes. Ifwe go out and surprise him before he is across [the Yellow River]we can totally upset him. We must not miss this chance."
Yang Qiao was a man of graceful carriage and great elegance. He sent in a number of comments about questions of government. The emperor was delighted by his talents and good looks, and he wanted to marry Yang Qiao to a princess.Yang Qiao refused very firmly, however, and would not hear of the proposal. Then he went on a hunger strike, and after seven days he died.
"I have been a Gentleman for fifteen years, and have seen and heard for myself all that Zhu Yu has done; it is indeed more than August Heaven can pardon.
From this, the officials recommended that Cheng Jin and Liu Zhi had committed crimes worthy of public execution.
Guo Tai and Fu Rong each paid him a visit, sending in their cards, and he lodged with them.
On the day yichou [28 Aug] the Gentle and Generous Empress was buried at Yiling.
Of all traitors and rebels in the past, none have been so bad."
In the second month some bandits of Rongyang killed the magistrate of Zhongmou.
Your majesty, however, failed to keep his comments confidential, but allowed them to be known. The ringleaders among the wicked all licked their lips and sharpened their tongues in competition to chew him up, and so that slanderous circular was fabricated.
Yuan Shang besieged him tightly.Yuan Tan sent Xin Pi,younger brother of Xin Ping, to go to Cao Cao and ask for help.
About this time news came that Duke Cao of WEI was moving against Hanzhong. Liu Bei was afraid he might lose Yi province, so he sent messengers to Sun Quan asking for peace.
"The empire can do without me," said Cao Hong, "but it cannot do without you."
Having completed his studies, Qiu Xiang returned to his native village. When he was home, he was always [50] dressed in formal clothes, and his wife and children served him as they would the sternest of rulers.
While they were still two hundred li short, the enemy realised was happening.
As a result, he had enemies both inside and outside the court, and they joined to accuse him of bribing the Qiang in order to bring about a false surrender.The emperor sent a series of letters under seal to reprimand him.
The Chancellor of Beihai, Kong Rong, said to Liu Bei, "Yuan Gonglu, is he a man to care for the state? Can he ever forget his lineage?
Besides this, last autumn there were heavy rains,and only now are the people beginning to plant their wheat.Instead of allowing them time to sow the grain, you have arranged for them to take part in the hunt, using corvée labour to drive the birds and clear the roads.This is not the policy of a worthy sage who cares for his people."
"If you receive the court now," replied Ju Shou, "you will be acting with justice to fulfil the needs of the time. Unless you decide quickly, someone else will be ahead of you."
Yuan Shao and Lü Bu attacked him together, and the fighting continued for more than ten days. Many of Zhang Yan's troops were killed or wounded, but Yuan Shao's army was also exhausted, and both sides drew back.
The Lady Dou had bitterly resented this and now, even as the emperor's coffin was still at the front of the Hall, she killed Tian Sheng.
Li Tan had a most tyrannical and fussy stepmother, but he treated her with the utmost respect, he obtained for her the most costly products of each of the four seasons, and every time he brought them to her he would always bow first.People of the district took his conduct as a model for their own.
I am certain that fifty thousand good men will be enough to deal with them. Do not worry about it."
You hold the imperial authority, and all essential military strength. With the leap of a dragon and the pace of a tiger, you may act as you will."The present plan, however, is like pumping up fire in a stove when all that is needed is to singe a hair.
In the eighth month on the day xinchou [18 Sep] the emperor moved into the Yang'an Apartments of the Southern Palace.
"Feng Gun previously defeated the barbarians of Jing province, and his merit is comparable to that of [Yin] Jifu.
I wish your majesty would publish my memorial to all your attendants, so the evil-doers of the empire may know of my hatred for them."
On the other hand, Qu Yuan and Yan Hui were not without their faults, and how much more did this apply to the other [associates of Confucius]! There is really no need to feel hatred or resentment. It is simply a matter of re-examining oneself."
The southern part of Jing province, with its natural barriers of hills and rivers, is truly the western defence-line of your state.
Besides, a vicious and deceitfill heart, if it stands in a brilliant court, will it last for long?"
Cao Cao said to Xun Yu, "The leaders west of the passes havemade formal submission, but amongst themselves they are planningtreachery. Zhang Cheng plunders and causes trouble between Xiaoand Mian, and he has contact with Liu Biao in the south. If Wei Gu[341] and the others follow his example, they could be a realdanger.
More than ten thousand officials and commoners died, the bodies scattered in the streets.
"At present, Cao Cao is in the north, and our borders have nopeace. Liu Bei is lodging with us, and that is like feeding a tiger.
Officers and men were delighted, and they all went out to take part.
Yuan Shu attacked Liu Bei to fight for Xu province.
Let us promise Sun Quan to keep it quiet, but let the news out privately.
When the emperor received this document he was extremely angry. An edict was issued to the Director of Retainers and to Yi province, that Cao Luan should be arrested and sent in a cage cart to the prison at Huaili. He was flogged to death with the bastinado.
Furthermore, though the Dowager has residence in the Southern Palace, she is not being treated with appropriate grace and courtesy. None of the ministers at court will raise this matter, but people everywhere are concerned and upset.
Now, men fighting in a good cause make the best soldiers, but supplies are needed to keep them at their posts.61 You must serve the Son of Heaven as a means to gain authority over those who would not submit to you otherwise, and you must re-establish agriculture to store up military supplies. If you do this, you may gain the position of a hegemon king.
Yuan Shu said,"Lü Bu refused me his daughter. It is right and natural that heshould be defeated. Why do you come again?"
But now your lordship is beginning to build a government, and you cannot go house to house through the empire to explain yourself You must show this man some respect or many of the people will be surprised and disap pointed."
Sun Quan rode together with Yu Jin. Yu Fan shouted at Yu Jin, "You are a surrendered prisoner. How dare you keep the head of your horse level with our lord's?"
On the day yichou [15 May] the Grand Commandant Qiao Xuan left office, and was appointed a Palace Counsellor. The Palace Counsellor Duan Jiong became Grand Commandant.
"Why do you say that?"asked the emperor.
In the third month on the day rernu [18 Apr] the Grand Tutor Hu Guang died at the age of eighty-two sui.
In the fifth month the Minister of the Guards Liu Kuan became Grand Commandant.
Now Cao Caoholds the emperor and so gives orders to the empire. If you raise anarmy against the south, you put yourself in the wrong.
all with flags of the Yuan army. Gagging themen and tying the horses' mouths, they went out by night andmoved along side-paths between the roads. The men carried boundfirewood. If anyone questioned them, they explained that, "LordYuan is afraid Cao Cao may attack his afterguard, so he is sending reinforcements to the defence."
The emperor ordered the Imperial Clerk Hou Wen to give out grain and beans from the main granary so that people could make gruel,
Then is your majesty afraid those two [Cao Ren and Xu Huang] will not use their utmost strength?
If he turns against you, I can lead soldiers to attackhis rear. If he only attacks the city, then you can give help fromoutside.
Cen Zhi and Zhang Mu got away and fled into hiding.
Li Gao was transferred to be Minister of Finance. Hiding himself in a grain and fodder storehouse, Su Buwei tunnelled under a wall to gain entry to [128] Li Gao's bedroom. There he killed Li Gao's concubine and also his small son.
On the other hand, if you surrender to Cao Cao, where would you go?
while he did not appoint civil officials, but all weregoverned by Libationers.
If you attack now, without waiting for reinforcements, then the booty you will gain will be so great that the few pieces you have lost will not be worth remem-bering."
On the other hand, the rebels have no supplies, nothing but what they can plunder.
Then Zhao Qi came to make peace in the east of the passes. Gongsun Zan accepted a truce with Yuan Shao and each side led their troops away.
He was, however, extremely upset when he found out how he had been duped by Cao Jie and the eunuch party. He firmly refused [the fief].
As Liu Xun came back to Pengze, Sun Ben and Sun Fuintercepted and defeated him.
It is obvious that the people could manage a hundred years without a currency of exchange, but they cannot last a single day if they are starved.
In the ninth month Cao Cao brought his whole army forward acrossthe Wei.
"The famous leaders of the past were given an axe to rule their armies, and any of them would cut off a man's head if it served his purpose.
Zhu Mu remained on his knees and was reluctant to get up, but those in attendance ordered him, "Go!"
In the third month King Cao of WEI came through the Yegu Pass from Chang'an and set his army to cover the important points on the approaches to Hanzhong."
Qianwan, King of the Di, rebelled to join Ma Chao and campedat Xingguo. Xiahou Yuan led his army back.
4: 175 AD
Du Shang was afraid he would be blamed [for not having destroyed the rebellion completely in the earlier stage of the campaign], so he sent in a false report that some bandits from Cangwu had entered his territory. As a result, an imperial edict ordered Zhang Pan to report to the Ministry of Justice.
By contrast, the wisdom and strategy of Commissioner Cao are not of this world, but rather gifts from Heaven.
Wicked men realise that when a good man's work is noticed, the signs of their own destruction appear. They will use deceit and falsehood and will combine to create distrust and hypocrisy.
And now, if you do not take warning from the failures of the past but continue in the same way,
combined their forces to attack Yingtao, but Ox-horn was struck by an arrow and mortally wounded. Before he died, he ordered [193] his followers to obey Flying Swallow as their leader, and Flying Swallow changed his surname to Zhang.
You, master and servant, are both stupid anddisobedient. You hide away in the furthest corner of the empire andturn your backs to the royal commands. You claim to usurp appoint ments and you interfere in the powers of the emperor. You shouldbe killed at once. How dare you rudely and lightly slander a greatman!"
I am fleeing now to escape sharp weapons, but I have no wish to make trouble.
Sun Quan gave a feast aboard one of his warships. He Qi got down from his mat and wept and said, "Your honour is a ruler of men. You should always be heavily guarded. In today's affair, when you almost came to misfortune,
About this time an imperial edict commanded that the clerical officials of the Three Excellencies should report upon rumours and sayings among the people.Fan Pang sent in a memorial against twenty and more inspectors, administrators and chancellors, and men of powerful family who had formed factions to abuse their power.
The Protector of the Qiang Duan Jiong attacked the Dangjian Qiang and defeated them.
A special edict was issued to summon Liu Yu in order that he might discuss the evidence of portents and disasters.
He drew up histroops, several ten thousand in number, and sacrificed a white horseto confirm the covenant, giving orders that, "Anyone who turnsaway will be killed."
"I was the only man to be a danger to Your Excellency,"explained Lü Bu, "and now I have submitted to you. Put me incharge of cavalry while you command the infantry, and the empirewill present no difficulties."
In the third month, it was once again ordered that inspectors and officials of Two Thousand shi and above should not carry out the three-year mourning period.
You may look north [to Liu Yu], but I turn west [to the emperor at Chang'an]."
Cao Cao and Liu Bei faced one another for several months, and many of Cao Cao's men deserted.
"The house of Han has ruled the empire for over four hundred years," replied Yuan Shao. "Its grace and favour influence all the realm, and the people look up to it.
The best plan is go south against Jing province and wait forsomething to happen. When things have changed, we can attackthem, and the whole affair may be settled in a single blow." "Excellent!" said Cao Cao, and in the fifth month, leaving hiscommander Jia Xin in camp at Liyang, he returned to Xu city. [318]
Cao Cao's officers asked him, "When we first arrived, the enemy were holding the Tong Pass, but they had no defencepositions along the route north of the Wei. You did not go throughHedong to attack [Zuo]pingyi, but instead you halted at the pass,and it was some time before you crossed to the north. Why wasthat?" "The enemy were holding the Tong Pass," replied Cao Cao. "Had I gone into Hedong immediately they would certainly have sent guards back to cover every crossing, and I could never have got over to the west of the River. "So I reinforced the troops facing the pass. The enemy were all concerned about the south, so they left the west of the River undefended, and just two officers [Xu Huang and Zhu Ling] were sufficient to take that position [and form a bridgehead at Puban].
As soon as he came in, however, hekilled them both. He named himself General Who Subdues theWest, with command as Governor of Bing province and Controllerof Military Affairs in Liang province.
Hou Wen was beaten fifty times, and after that everyone got full measure.
"Should I be destroyed, moreover, the whole realm will be indanger. I am not prepared to give up my life for a meaninglessreputation.
but Tian Feng pressed his argu ment. Believing he would upset the morale of the army, Yuan Shaohad him chained up.
In the eighth month there were established for the first time the eight Colonels of the Western Garden:the Attendant of the Yellow Gates Jian Shi was Colonel of the First Army;the General of the Household Rapid as a Tiger Yuan Shao was Colonel of the Second Army;the Colonel of the Garrison Cavalry Bao Hong became Colonel of the Third Army;the Consultant Cao Cao became Colonel Who Arranges the Army; Zhao Rong became Colonel on the Left Assisting the Army;Feng Fang became Colonel on the Right Assisting the Army;the Counsellor Remonstrant Xia Mou became Colonel of the Left; Chunyu Qiong became Colonel of the Right.All were under the command of Jian Shi.10
You should avoid all contact with people in general, have no erratic comings and goings, and be very careful not to say one word about the Liang clan.
So the south willwant to fight early, while delay gives advantage to the north.
"No-one knows what Yuan Shao really wants. You,however, bring forward with ceremony those who do right, andyou use the law to correct those who do wrong. This issuperiority in civil administration.
Then Jia Cong issued a proclamation to say that everyone should carry on his occupation in peace, and he received and comforted the homeless refugees and remitted the taxes and corvee levies. Only [184] the most troublesome ringleaders were executed, and he then made careful selection of the best men to show their ability as heads of counties. The disturbance was settled within a year, and all the people were at peace.
Su Buwei also dug up the grave of Li Gao's father, cut off the headof the corpse, took it away with him and hung it up in a market-place.
Even if you 'took the Yin and Yang as your fuel, and the myriad things of the world as your metal,even if all the work was done by people who needed nothing to eat, supervised by officials who were never hungry, there would still not be enough satisfy the unending deman.
On the day dingchou [7 Jul] there was an earthquake in the capital district, and there was another on the day wuyin [8 Jul].
For the first time he sent a Supervisor of the Internuncios to overseethe salt office and had the Director of Retainers set his office atHongnong.
In the winter, in the tenth month on the day bingchen [26 Nov], the emperor went hunting at the Guangcheng Park, and then proceeded to visit the Hangu Pass and the Shanglin Park.
If you raise an army and attack, you will surely defeat them. When you have done that, encourage farming and build stores of grain, look for some grievance and await opportunity. At best, you will overturn the enemy and preserve the royal house; at a second level, you may nibble away at Yong and Liang provinces and so extend your territory; and at the very least, you can set firm guard on the strategic points and secure yourself a long time to come.
If you stay here in Luoyang, it will not be easy to managematters. The only thing to do is shift the emperor to Xu city.
When Han established Flying Swallow [Zhao Feiyan] the succession and the sacrifices were broken and ended.
Then Zhang Yan sent messengers to the capital with a memorial asking to surrender, and he was appointed General of the Household Who Pacifies Disorder and given change of all the affairs of the hills and valleys north of the Yellow River. Every year he was entitled to nominate Filial and Incorrupt candidates and to send in Reporting Officers.
Liang Ji heard about this and was furious.He had the office of the capital put out a summons for the arrest of the two men.Hu Wu's whole household was punished, and more than sixty people died.
On the day gengzi [19 Jul] Yang Feng and Han Xian escorted the emperor back to the east. Zhang Yang brought supplies for the journey.
In the eighth month the Qiang of [Zuo]pingyi plundered the counties of that commandery. Guo Si, Fan Chou and the others led out their troops and defeated them.
The emperor sought to avoid this. He made a great levy of soldiers from all directions and held manoeuvres by the Lodge of Tranquil Joy. A great platform was set up, with twelve ceremonial umbrellas on top, each a hundred feet high.
The Han house is in decline, replied Tian Chou, "and people are getting ideas of rebellion. Lord Liu was the one man who never lacked loyalty or honour.
Han Sui led his forces to make peace between Ma Teng and Li Jue, but then he too joined Ma Teng.
None of them, however, are any use in dealing with military matters, and now they have taken up arms against you they are simply not in your class.
In both places [Hanzhong and Nan commandery] their fortunes hang in the balance, and even to survive requires more energy than they can afford. How can they possibly find the extra resources to deal with this part of the world?
Cao Cao faced and attackedhim, and Shen Pei was defeated and forced back.
His officers wanted to build earth mounds and construct machines for an assault, but Lii Meng said, "If we make engines and earthworks, it will be days before they are ready. The city will be prepared, relief troops will arrive, and we shall not be able to manage them.
Cao Cao wanted Zhang Hong to persuade Sun Quan into a closealliance. He appointed him Commandant of the Eastern Region ofKuaiji,
Harsh and strict by nature, Chen Fan seldom gave a welcome to clients or dependent guests.When Xu Zhi came, however, he prepared a special couch for him, and when he went away he hung it up again.
Du Shang gave orders for the men to feed the horses, and to rest and eat, and next day he led his men direct to the enemy camp. Bu Yang and Pan Hong and their fellows felt secure in their isolated fastness, and had no further preparations for defence. The imperial forces took advantage of their surprise, and the enemy were smashed and settled.
Sun Ce gave a great laugh and said, "I will share all my planswith you.
Yuan Shao, moreover, treated the people and barbarians well, and Yuan Shang and his brother are still there.
Drawing his sword, he chopped the desk in front of him, saying, "Any officer who still dares argue for surrender will suffer like this."
As a result, many false accusations were made by one against another, and thousands were put to death without good cause.
Zhang Liao, Li Dian and Yue Jin had a combined force of some seven thousand men stationed at that city.
yet I have heard that Deng Zun, father of the Intendant of Henan Deng Wanshi,has been granted posthumous honours for very minor achievements,and the broken inheritance of the fief once held by the ancestors of the Director of the Secretariat Huang Jun is now being restored.
Zhang Lu was officially a man from Pei, but the leadership of the Five Dou of Rice sect had been with his family since the time of his grandfather Zhang Ling, and they had migrated to live in Shu.
Mi Fang held the city [of Jiangling, capital of Nan commandery], but when Lü Meng showed Shi Ren to him, Mi Fang too opened his gates and surrendered.
When Liu Bei settled SHU, he divided Guanghan to form Zi- tong commandery, and appointed Huo Jun as Administrator.
As Sun Quan came near, they opened the instructions and read, "If Sun Quan comes, Generals Zhang and Li go out to fight, General Yue keeps guard, the Protector of the Army does not fight."
Chen Ji was the son of Chen Shi, Han Rong was the son of Han Shao.
Sun Quan was in the utmost grief and pain, and three hundred families were set to maintain Lü Meng's tomb.
On the day bingwu [5 May] Sun Ce died. He was then agedtwenty-six.
and Liu Biao was angry. Because Huang Zu,the Administrator of Jiangxia, had a quick temper, he sent Ni Hengto him.
Jian'an 17: 212 AD
The Imperial Clerk Liu Yao was a younger brother of Liu Dai. He had earlier gained a fine reputation, and an imperial letter was sent to appoint him as Inspector of Yang province.
Jian'an 21: 216 AD
Once Zhang Lu is defeated then Yi province will bestrong; even if Lord Cao does come there will be nothing he can do.
Sun Jian said, "Your excellency, you are the leader of an imperial army and your authority makes the empire tremble. Why must you rely on Dong Zhuo?
As soon as Cao Cao heard that Xu You had come, he went barefootto greet him, grasped him by the hand and laughed, "Ziyuan, youhave come a long way. 41 Now I am sure to succeed."
The siege works were set inseveral [453] rings about the city, and during the night Yan Wenstealthily followed the river.
My Registrar, Yang Hui, shall act as my Cheng Ying."
In the spring, in the first month on the day dingyou [29 Feb], there was an amnesty for the empire.
Just make the plans we need to defeat Huang Zu.Why need you object to anything that Chief Clerk Zhang may say?"
Zhang Yang sent Dong Cheng to restore the palaces at Luoyang,
Flying Swallow's personal name was Yan [meaning a swallow] and he was quick and agile and brave, so the men of his army called him Flying Swallow.
Wang Fu was confirmed in his recent appointment as Regular Attendant and Prefect of the Yellow Gates.
If you are ever going to use the people of Wu and Yue against the power of central China, then the sooner the better. If you cannot manage it, then why have you not restrained your troops, curbed your armed men, and faced north to serve Cao Cao?
Cao Cao went to offer sacrifice at the tomb of Yuan Shao, and weptfor him until the tears flowed.
Soon after this, the armies at Suanzao ran out of food and the allied forces dispersed.
Chen Deng the Administrator of Guangling had his capital at She yang. When Sun Ce went west to attack Huang Zu, Chen Dengencouraged the remnants of White Tiger Yan's following to maketrouble behind him.
On this one occasion the King of Hanzhong is honouring the house of Han, and he rewards a man for his achievement, why should you believe that his affection for you is no different to that which he holds for others?
Before this, Wang Song of Yuyang had occupied Zhuo command ery. Liu Fang, a man of that commandery, now persuaded him tooffer his territory to Cao Cao. Cao Cao appointed Liu Fang Adviserto the Army of the Excellency of Works.
Li Ying replied, "If there are problems in affairs, one does not make excuses, and if one is at fault, one does not seek to evade punishment. That is the proper conduct of a minister.
In the ninth month on the day xinhai [25 Oct] Dou Wu had left the palace to spend the night at his own residence.
Now that Yang Qiu had executed Wang Fu, he wanted to proceed further with a memorial against Cao Jie and his party. So he gave instructions to his Assistant Officer for Officials at the Capital, "My first priority is the chief rascals among the powerful and the honoured [the eunuchs and others within the palace], then I shall consider the rest.
Liu Biao's wife of the Cai clan protested, "Han Song is the hopeof the state of Chu. He is perfectly correct, and you have no rightto execute him."
Yuan Shu had made Zhou Yu magistrate of Juchao and appointedLu Su of Linhuai as magistrate of Dongcheng.
In the autumn, in the seventh month, there was a comet in the Supreme Subtlety [Enclosure].
The empire is in disorder," replied He Jin, "and it is all your fault.
At this time, the whole of Liang province was in continual disorder and rebellion, and the court had constant need for corvee service and taxes. Cui Lie proposed that Liang province be abandoned,
You wish to do away with the son of the legal wife and set the son of a concubine in his place, but I fear the people will not accept your argument."
Taishi Ci went forward nonetheless, and he came face to face with Sun Ce.Sun Ce wounded Taishi Ci's horse, and grasped the dagger above Taishi Ci's neck. Taishi Ci got Sun Ce's helmet.
Yuan Shao was embarrassed and annoyed to be lower in rankthan Cao Cao. He remarked angrily that, "There were severaloccasions Cao Cao was in danger of death, and I was quick to helphim and save him. Now he is making use of the Son of Heaven togive me orders." He sent in a memorial with excuses and refused theappointment.
[Cao Cao] also wanted to have him rank with the Three Excellencies but Xun Yu sent Xun You to make it clear that he would refuse such an honour. After more than ten attempts, Cao Cao gave up the idea.
Ju Jun cursed him and said, "You and your fellows have made brutal rebellion. You oppress the emperor, you have brought harm to the highest ministers, and the palace women are scattered abroad.
An imperial edict ordered the Director of Retainers Liu Meng to search out and arrest those responsible, and to report results every ten days.
Liu Bei heard of the situation. He came himself from SHU to Gongan, and he sent Guan Yu to fight for the three commanderies.
In the sixth month on the day renwu [15 Aug] the Minister of Ceremonies Liu Yi of Nanyang became Excellency of Works.
The bandits may be expert with long lances, but I canarrange things so they will not be able to use them. Just watch!"
Zang Ba went into hiding, Cao Cao raised a search and foundhim, then sent him to call Wu Dun, Yin Li, Sun Guan and theothers; all came to Cao Cao and surrendered.
His officers urged that he attack WhiteTiger Yan and his allies first,
The Inspector of Qing province, Jiao He, had also raised troops to attack Dong Zhuo. He made every effort to join the other leaders in the march to the west, but he had prepared no defences for his own people, and even as his soldiers crossed the Yellow River the Yellow Turbans were already within his borders.38
The brotherswere defeated, however, in one battle after another, and they with drew to positions of defence.
Dong Zhuo appointed his younger brother Min General of the Left, while Dong Huang, son of his elder brother, was Colonel of the Centre Army. Both had control of military affairs.All the members of the Dong clan or relations by marriage held rank at court.
So Tao Qian sent Zhao Yu to take a memorial to Chang'an.
Soldiers will join you and the people will fight for you. In the south you can hold Jiangling, and on the north you will guard Xiangyang. You have only to give the order, and the eight commanderies of Jing province will be settled.
"Even when Zhang Jue has been beheaded and his followers have changed their clothing and submitted to law and order, your servant will still be anxious that things may get worse.
The Palace Counsellor Liu Ju became Grand Commandant.
Sun Quan came forward and wiped his tears for him, saying, "I am grateful and ashamed. Caution is now engraved on my heart, not just written on a girdle."
Shi Bi of Chenliu, Adjutant of the Northern Army, sent in a sealed letter, "I have heard that the proper attitude of an emperor or king towards his relatives and kinsmen is that although his affection is abundant he will certainly display it with authority, and even though the person is of noble birth he will certainly apply the regular restraints to him.
In the spring, in the third month, an imperial edict ordered that Confucian scholars should produce a correct edition of the Five Classics. The Consultant Cai Yong was commissioned to write the text in the three scripts of Old Style, Seal and Clerical Style. They were then to be carved upon stone, and the stele set up outside the gate of the Imperial University.It was intended that both senior scholars and junior students should accept these texts as authoritative.
For these reasons, serving the majesty of Great Han, I have set up a plan for the long term. I intend to cut the problem out by the roots, so it will never grow again.
In the summer, in the fifth month an edict granted King Cao of WEI the banners and flags of the Son of Heaven. When he went out or in the road should be cleared of all other traffic.
Cao Cao besieged Yongqiu. Zhang Miao went to Yuan Shu to ask help [for his brother Zhang Chao in that city] but on the way he was killed by his own men.
In the past, Zhu Han had been treated rudely by Han Fu, and he now sought to anticipate Yuan Shao's intentions. Without authority he brought troops to surround Han Fu's house and went in carrying a sword. Han Fu fled to the upper storey, but Zhu Han seized his eldest son, beat him and broke both his legs.
On the day xinsi [6 Jul] the General of Chariots and Cavalry Li Jue became Grand Marshal, ranking above the Three Excellencies.
Then Liu Zhang sent Li Yan of Nanyang and Fei Guan ofJiangxia as Protectors of the Army to take control of all the forces atMianzhu, but they too led their troops to surrender to Liu Bei.
So for the time being Zhang He became head of the army.
Guo Si gave a feast for the high ministers, and discussed an attack on Li Jue.
Through Chen Deng, Lü Bu had asked to be made Governor ofXu province, but this was not approved.
Then he brokethrough the siege lines, galloped his horse to the walls and called tothe men above. The guards drew him up with a rope, and so he gotin.
The people are weary of disorder, and now that disorder has reached its limit, it will soon be settled. Let me be the first."
Yuan Shao has an army which is isolated, dependent and poor; he relies on us for everything. Like a child on the lap, if you end its suckling it will starve and die. Why do you want to give him the province?"
And brave men are rising everywhere, each with a province or a commandery. They gather followers and collect their forces, and whenever they move they can number their troops by the tens of thousands. This is the time that the Qin have lost a deer, and the first to catch it will rule as king.
Huang Zu, however, was at Xiakou, and Gan Ning's troop could not get past. He was obliged to stay three years with Huang Zu, who treated him as no better than an ordinary soldier.
Sun Ce entrusted his mother and younger brothers to Zhang Hong of Guangling and went straight to Shouchun to see Yuan Shu.
In the winter, in the tenth month, the bandit Ou Xing of Changsha took title as a general. He commanded an army of more than ten thousand men. An edict appointed the Consultant Sun Jian as Administrator of Changsha, and he attacked the bandits and pacified them. Sun Jian was enfeoffed as Marquis of Wucheng.
Zhai Rong, however, took the grain for his own purposes. He raised a great Buddhist hall of worship, encouraged people to read the Buddhist sutras, and brought in those of nearby commanderies who loved the Buddha, more than five thousand households.
Zhang Song the Attendant Officer of Yi province was a closefriend of Fa Zheng. He was confident of his own abilities, and he too felt that Liu Zhang did not appreciate him, so he was privatelydiscontented.
The Controller of the Army Du Xi and Xiahou Yuan's Major Guo Huai of Taiyuan collected the scattered troops and issued a statement to all the army, "General Zhang is a celebrated leader of our state, and Liu Bei is afraid of him.
"If only your majesty would dismiss these artful but deceitful ministers, and keep them at a distance; and if you would invite men of true distinction. Break up the one-foot tablets, and put a halt to this search for pleasure. Then we may hope that high Heaven will withdraw its warnings and all uncertainty among the people can be dispelled."
Just for the moment, Chen Gong and his fellows are obliged to be friendly with him, but they will never accept him as their chief. Though he has many soldiers, he will come to nothing in the end.
The Counsellor Remonstrant Liu Tao sent in a memorial to say, "A short time ago the empire suffered the disorders of Zhang Jue, and since then we have the rebellion of Bian Zhang on our hands. Now the rebel Qiang from the west have already attacked Hedong, and I am afraid they may grow strong enough to attack the capital itself.
This surelymeans that he is undecided and has no heart for the fight.
He Xun said, "In ancient times, Wuding was a brilliant ruler, but he still sought wise rebuke.16 This is yet more true for someone like you, but you want to force men into silence."
Realising that he was cut off, Guan Yu went west to hold Maicheng.
The elders sang his praises: of all the officials they had known or heard of, there had never been an Inspector like Liang Xi.
He went back to Cao Cao, and Cao Cao appointed him magistrate ofLangling.
If I had used my own resources, however, my household would be now in the most abject poverty.If [on the other hand] I had used government funds, the records would be easy to trace.
Lord Cao holds the Son of Heaven and so commands theempire, that is one.
Liu Sheng, a man from the same [Yingchuan] commandery as Du Mi, had also returned to his native region from an official post in Shu commandery. He kept his gates closed and his carriageway shut, and had no contact with anyone.
Guo Si made plans with a member of Li Jue's party, the General of the Household Zhang Bao, for a secret attack,
At this time Zhou Yu was away on a mission in Poyang, and Lu Su urged Sun Quan to call him back.
Before this, the Protector of the Qiang Duan Jiong had settled the Western Qiang,but the Xianlian and other groups of the Eastern Qiang had still not submitted. The General on the Liao Huangfu Gui and the General of the Household Zhang Huan had brought them in year after year, but each time they surrendered they would rebel again afterwards.
Furthermore, he spoke in extravagant terms with the worthless scholar Ni Heng,and they praised one another.
Li Yun sent in a letter, of the type no wise ruler can ignore; Du Zhong asked for death with a sincerity to move your sage's court, but for neither of them was there pardon or compassion, and both were slain. "Every person in the empire has seen the injustice, and since the age that Han arose, there has never been such a time as the present for rejecting good advice, executing worthy men, and using the law with such excessive severity!
The WEI troops scattered and formed again, then pursued him to his camp.Zhao Yun entered the camp, threw open the gates, put the flags away and kept the drums silent.
Though the Yellow Turbans are numerous they are no cause for anxiety to your court.
The Assistant Officer was extremely angry. He had the junior officers of the commandery arrested and jailed, and he sent in a report about Shi Bi.
Sun Quan also gave Liu Zhang appointment as Governor of Yi province, with temporary residence at Zigui.Soon afterwards Liu Zhang died.
Lü Meng heard that Cao Cao intended to bring soldiers to the east,and he urged Sun Quan to establish a fortress near the mouth of theRuxu River.
It is inappropriate that I should even hear of such a plan."
In the eighth month there was a comet in the Heavenly Market.
The Inspector of Yu province, Guo Gong, brought an army of several ten thousand men below the walls of [Juancheng] city. Some said that he was in the plan with Lu Bu, and everyone was afraid.
Ju Shou said to Yuan Shao, "You should send Jiang Qi out witha separate force to guard against Cao Cao's raids."
Just as you have five generations succeeding one another as great ministers of the Han, a splendour and favour to which none may compare, so you should express your loyalty and maintain your honour as a subject, to repay the royal house. Then you will have the good reputation of Dan [the Duke of Zhou] and Shi [the Duke of Shao]. All the world will admire you.
He Kui, Administrator of Changguang,29 said to Cao Cao, "The[282] former kings distinguished the taxes of the nine tributaries,taking notice of distance, and they maintained three sets ofregulations [for governing according to conditions] of recentpacification, good administration or rebellion.
and when Yuan Tan arrived he failed to gain theinheritance. Yuan Tan went to camp at Liyang and styled himself Generalof Chariots and Cavalry.
Liu Biao loved the people and cared for scholars. He maintained aneasy government and had no trouble in his territory. Of the scholars from the west of the passes, from Yan province and from Yu, thosethat came to him were numbered by the thousands.
Fan Fang did lead his cavalry away, but before he had rejoined Gongsun Zan, Gongsun Zan had been defeated.
Ji province has a strong army, objected Yuan Shao, "and my troops are hungry and weary. If we are unsuccessful we shall be left with nothing."
"Now, salt is the great treasure of the state, but since therebellion it has been left untended. You should appoint commission ers to supervise its sale as in former times, and use the profit tobuy ploughs and cattle so that we can give them to the people asthey return. If we [258] encourage farming, then grain can becollected to make the land prosper. When people hear about it faraway, we can be sure that they will travel day and night in order toreturn as quickly as possible.
His true favourites were merchants and common fellows, whom he treated like brothers and accepted as relatives by marriage. Such men behaved as bullies, and the people hated them.
Only Zhi Xi went and looked after the body, saying, "If Wenju has left me and is dead, what have I to live for?"
Do you doubt the temper of my sword?"
On another occasion, they were playing with dogs in the Western Garden, and the emperor dressed one with the Cap of Worthy Advancement and tied a sash about it.
When he came to the execution ground he swore at theman with the axe and demanded to be allowed to face north, saying,"My master is out there."
Shi Xie was a tolerant and generous man, and many gentlemenfrom central China came to him.
In the intercalary month, on the day xinyou [27 Oct], there was a fire in the offices of the Lateral Courts and the Long Lanes, at the east of the Northern Palace.
Now if I can have five thousand cavalry and ten thousand foot soldiers, with three thousand carts [for the supply train], then in three winters and two summers I shall crush them and settle them for good. There need be no concern the expenses will go beyond 5,400 million cash.
On the day xinsi [7 Jun] He Jin brought troops to surround the offices of the General of Agile Cavalry. He arrested Dong Zhong and stripped him of his appointment. Dong Zhong killed himself.
Ni Heng said to Kong Rong, 'Zhongni [Confucius] is not dead!' and Kong Rong replied, 'Yan Hui lives again!' This is Great Refractoriness and Impiety, to be punished with the utmost rigour."
About this time Sun Quan came to Jiangling, and the military and civil officers of Jing province came to attend him. Only the Headquarters Officer Pan Jun of Wuling claimed to be sick and refused to come to audience.
all the bad elements of the past were eliminated, and wherever he went everything was set in good order. He returned to camp at Wuhu.
Liu Yu sent in a memorial that all the troops in camp should be disbanded, leaving only Gongsun Zan, Colonel Who Brings the Caitiffs to Surrender, with command of ten thousand horse and foot in Youbeiping.
"Your majesty should take action to remove any opportunities for your eunuch attendants to be involved in government. You should call in the officers of your secretariat and your court, to appoint and promote only those who are pure and of high moral quality, and to criticise and eliminate those who are wicked and base.
When the requirements of conduct are awkward andexaggerated, they only encourage secrecy and deception."
Before this, the Grand Commandant Yuan Tang had three sons, Yuan Cheng, Yuan Feng and Yuan Wei.
Yuan Shao crossed the Yellow River to follow them, but JuShou objected, saying, "When fighting a war, you must take care toconsider every possibility.
On the day yimao [miswritten for xinmao = 17 Jan] Zhang Yang came from Yewang to pay court. He planned to escort the emperor back to Luoyang, but the other leaders would not agree, and he went back to Yewang.
Before this, Wang Yun had claimed all credit for killing Dong Zhuo, while Shisun Rui would take no reward and rejected a fief as a marquis. So now he escaped misfortune.
The Chancellor of Pei Chen Gui, son of a younger brother ofChen Qiu, had been a companion of Yuan Shu when he wasyoung.
Yuan Shao had attacked Gongsun Zan for several years but had notbeen able to defeat him. He wrote a letter to Gongsun Zansuggesting that they end their quarrel and make peace.
"Your majesty should remember how Yu-Shun dealt with the four criminals, and should quickly arrange the execution of your false advisers. Then good men will be glad to come forward and evil will naturally disappear."
When Zhang Lu fled to the territory of Ba, Huang Quan said to Liu Bei? Once we lose Hanzhong, the Three Ba will be in danger, and this would cut away the rump and the back of SHU.
replied Sun Ce, "as a gentleman of family you have numbers of men under your command, and you have already made a reputation for yourself on campaign. Why should you accept such a low appointment and to attend the petty details of my army?"
In this year the emperor ordered a market set up in the harem apartments and had all his women trade there. They robbed and fought one another, and the emperor dressed as a peddler, joined the crowd and drank wine and feasted with them.
Yuan Shao was truly fond of Zang Hong. He had hoped to compel his submission and then forgive him. Seeing, however, that Zang Hong meant what he said, he realised he would never serve him. So he killed him.
Since I am leaving you for such a long time, however, I can drink and feast just this once."
By any code of honour, such a great reason obliged [244]me to leave him. That is the whole story of my joining Gonglu andmy breaking with him.
In the twelfth month [miswritten for the eleventh],38 as the emperor reached Hongnong. Zhang Ji, Li Jue and Guo Si came in pursuit. There was a great battle at Dongjian in Hongnong, and Dong Cheng and Yang Feng were defeated. The officials, lower officers and commoners who died were too many to count. They abandoned the imperial insignia and tallies, the tablets for appointment, the records and books. Almost nothing remained.
Li Xian spoke: "I have always felt this way. He has expressed things exactly the way that I would."
Liu Biao thought only that Han Song was reluctant, and insistedthat he go.
Xu You said, "Cao Cao has few soldiers, and he has brought hiswhole army to face us [at Guandu]. There cannot be many of hismen left at Xu city.
In the second month, on the day yihai [28 Mar] Dong Zhuo memorialised that because of disasters and strange happen- ings, Huang Wan, Yang Biao and others should be dismissed. The Minister of the Household Zhao Qian became Grand Commandant and the Minister Coachman Wang Yun was made Excellency over the Masses.The Colonel of the City Gates Wu Qiong and the Colonel Who Controls the Army Zhou Bi strongly criticised the proposal to shift the capital. Dong Zhuo was very angry and said, "When I first came to court you two urged me to employ fine scholars. I accepted your advice and these men came to office,
In the eighth month there were great rains, the Han River broke its banks and the whole plain was covered by water scores of feet deep.
The barbarians have always acted proudly and wilfully, and too much leniency will make the government slack. When things have become slack and then you try to restore law and order, it brings hatred and rebellion.
Han Ji of Nanyang had avoided a summons from Yuan Shu and had gone to live in the Shandu Hills.
I ask to go forward with the General WhoDisplays Majesty [Sun Yu], to seize Shu and then take over ZhangLu. I shall leave the General Who Displays Majesty to hold thatterritory in alliance with Ma Chao, and come back to join you.
As to the excellencies, ministers and great clans such as the Yuan, you can deal with them yourself. Why should I become involved there?"
He used charmed water to treat illness, and he made those who were sick kneel down and confess their faults. Some got better, and so people worshipped and believed in him.
When he was young, he served Ma Rong, a great scholar of extravagant tastes, who had a constant supply of girls to sing and dance for him. Lu Zhi attended Ma Rong for many years, but never turned his eyes in their direction. Ma Rong admired him for this.
Chen Qiu replied, "Chen Fan and Dou Wu suffered wrong, and the dowager was incarcerated without good reason. This is a constant source of anguish to me, and a cause of resentment and anger throughout the empire.
The Intendant of Henan, Zhu Jun, spoke with Dong Zhuo on military matters, but Dong Zhuo cut him short, saying, "In a hundred battles I have gained a hundred victories. I have made my decision. Stop this nonsense or I shall dirty my sword on you."
In the third month Zhang Fei and Ma Chao withdrew.
I cannot compare with him, replied Han Fu.
"The leaders within the passes," replied Xun Yu, "are numberedby the score. No-one can bring them together. Han Sui and Ma Tengare the only strong ones,
Shentu Pan of Chenliu was a man of poor family who had worked as an artisan in lacquer. When Yu Cheng of Yanling [in Yingchuan] was a young man, he was a janitor at his county headquarters. Guo Tai saw them and admired them, and both of them later became celebrated scholars.
Pang Degong's nephew, Pang Tong, was a dull fellow when he was young, and only Pang Degong and Sima Hui were able to recognise his quality.
The Master of Writing Zhu Mu memorialised, "In this matter of army supplies, Feng Gun is unduly concerned to clear himself of suspicion. This is not the way that a high officer should behave."An edict was issued that the criticism [of Feng Gun] be considered no further.
and Jianwei, while Zhang Fei took Baxi and Deyang,
"There are already five or six parks outside the city,11 quite enough to make anyone content, and adequate for all the four seasons.
Xu Shu went to call upon Liu Bei at Xinye, and Liu Bei held him in high regard.
"Yang Huai and Gao Pei are notable officers under Liu Zhang,and each commands a strong force at the head of the [Boshui]Pass. I have heard that they have written several times in protest toLiu Zhang, urging him to send you back to Jing province.
Taking ten ships of war,he filled them with tinder grass anddried wood, poured oil inside, then covered them with tent curtains and set up flags. He also prepared light fast boats and fastened them to the sterns.
An edict appointed Huangfu Gui as General of the Household bearing the Staff of Authority, to supervise all military operations west of the passes for the suppression of the Lianyu and the other tribes.
Many people were afraid that their numbers were becoming too great and that it would become increasingly difficult to keep them under control; some protection should be made against them.
Cao Cao brought his army to attack Liu Bei in Runan, and Liu Beifled to Liu Biao. Gong Du and the others were all scattered.
"No more than sixty days," replied Taishi Ci.
Clearness is an attribute of Yang; muddiness is an attribute of Yin.
So Duan Jiong took personal command, and advanced his positions to some forty or fifty li from Fanting Mountain, where the Qiang were encamped.He sent the Major of Cavalry Tian Yan and the Brevet Major Xia Yu,leading five thousand men, to go forward, attack and defeat them.
Cao Cao had relied on reports from Assistant Officers of Liang province and from men surrendered in Wudu, who had told him that "It is easy to attack Zhang Lu. The mountain ridges north and south ofYangping are a long way apart, and the pass is indefensible." Cao Cao believed them,
Yuan Shu knew that Sun Ce was resentful [because he had not received the appointments he had been promised], but since Liu Yao held Qu'a and Wang Lang was in Kuaiji he did not expect he would be successful. So he gave his permission,
All admired the honest way that Yan Jun had refused the appointment.
In the third month Liu Chang, Reverent King of Zhongshan, died. He had no sons, and the kingdom was abolished.
The Wuhu barbarians of Jiaozhi had long been making trouble, and the provincial and commandery authorities could do nothing to control them.
In the intercalary [fifth] month on the day gengchen [24 Jul], last of the month, there was an eclipse of the sun.
"My master had pity for Yuzhou, that he had no place to rest. He was generous with land and fighting men, and gave [Liu Bei] everything he needed to protect himself and to relieve his danger.
I have heard that when agentleman brings another into danger he must share the misfortune. Can I be the only one to survive?" He spurred his horse againstYuan Shao's army and died.
The Minister of Finance Zhang Huan wrote in as follows: "In former times the burial of the Duke of Zhou was [planned to be] held without proper rites, and Heaven showed its power.
In the spring, in the first month, Cao Cao returned to Xu city.
Every official, from inspectors and administrators down to Abundant Talent and Filial and Incorrupt candidates, whenever they were appointed or promoted, had to contribute cash for army funds or for the repair of the palace buildings. A man appointed to a large commandery had to pay twenty or thirty million cash, and smaller commanderies were in proportion. Those due to be given office had first to go to the Western Garden and negotiate a price before they could take up their posts. The more honest of them begged not to go, but all were compelled to do so.
"I haveheard," replied Chen Gong, "that a man who gives gentle govern ment to the empire will not cut off another man's sacrifices [bykilling his heir]. Whether my family lives or not, that rests with you,not with me."
"Qin acted against the true Way. Government was cruel and the people were angry, so when one common fellow gave a single cry their empire was crumbled earth. Gaozu came after this, and he could afford to be generous.
Liang Ji had held control of the government for almost twenty years, and his authority was recognised both inside [the palace] and out.The emperor's hands were tied, and he could take no action of his own.He was increasingly dissatisfied with this situation, and when Chen Shou died he was even more angry.
[In the second month] on the day guiyou [26 Mar] Dong Zhuo had the Prefect of the Gentlemen of the Palace Li Ru poison and kill Liu Bian the King of Hongnong.
Liang Ji heard about this, and sent men in secret to arrest Yuan Zhu.Yuan Zhu changed his name, and pretended he had taken ill and died.He made the figure of a man from rushes, purchased a coffin and had a public funeral performed.
The emperor is an exile, and you were among thefirst to call up loyal troops. The east of the mountains has beendisturbed and disordered, and that is the only reason you have hadno opportunity to come to his aid.
In the summer, in the fourth month, the Grand Commandant Cao Song left office.
Han Sui and the other leaders deposed Wang Guo and forced the former magistrate of Xindu, Yan Zhong of Hanyang, to take overall command of their forces.
ut instead you are making a marriageconnection with Yuan Shu. You will surely [218] get a reputationfor disloyalty, and your position will be less secure than a pile ofeggs."
Dong Zhuo also dug up He Miao's coffin, took out the body, broke up the joints and left it on the side of a road. He killed He Miao's mother the Lady of Wuyang and threw her corpse into some brambles in a park.
Sun Jian went back to his camp, and Dong Zhuo sent his officer Li Jue to treat with him, to make peace and arrange an alliance. He told Sun Jian to recommend junior members of his family as Inspectors or Administrators and promised to urge their appointment.
When there was some policy Cao Zhi did not understand, they would try to work out what Cao Cao wanted, and prepare ten or more forms of reply. Cao Zhi then told his attendants, "When [my father] issues an instruction, choose the right response and send it in." By this means the order was scarcely out before the answer came in. Amazed at the speed, Cao Cao investigated, and the trick was discovered.
Moreover, though Guan Yu and his master [Liu Bei] boast of their pretended power, they are very erratic and we cannot trust them.
but he was really quite annoyed, and in the end he killed him.
Lü Bu then took the edict-block from his breast and used it to take command of the troops, saying, "The order requires that Dong Zhuo be executed, and that is all. For the rest, there are no questions asked."
Wang Xiu said, "Though Guan Tong the Administrator ofDonglai is across the sea, he has not rebelled and he will certainlybring help."
On the day dingwei [29 Nov] Yang Feng, Dong Cheng and Yang Ding intended to attack Duan Wei. They sent Chong Ji and Zuo Ling to ask the emperor for an edict against him. The emperor said, "There is no evidence Duan Wei has done any-thing wrong, yet Yang Feng and the others are going to attack him. And you want me to issue an edict?"
The Excellency of Works Tang Zhen left office. The Steward of the Palace of Perpetual Joy Xu Xun became Excellency of Works.
and Zhang Xiu ledhis forces after him.
"You may have my head," replied Huo Jun, "but you cannot have the city."
Cao Cao increased the salary of Du Ji the Administrator ofHedong to Fully Two Thousand shi.
The Administrator of Danyang, Zhou Xin of Kuaiji, was on bad terms with Yuan Shu, and Yuan Shu recommended Sun Ce's maternal uncle Wu Jing in his stead. Wu Jing attacked Zhou Xin and seized the commandery, and he appointed Sun Ce's elder cousin Sun Ben as Commandant of Danyang.
Unless we put some short-term strain upon the people now, we can never hope for a long-lasting peace.
Now, when Sun Quan was at Ruxu, Jiang Qin and Lü Meng were responsible for all his forces, and Jiang Qin always praised Xu Sheng. Sun Quan asked about it.
4: 187 AD
On the other hand, if they keep their camps together from winter into spring and do not spread out, the men and their animals will waste and die; they will be destroyed by their very strength. So all [Zhang Huan] does is encourage surrenders, for in that way a strong enemy can be kept under control without taking action.
Liu Bei recommended Sun Quan as Acting General of Chariotsand Cavalry with command as Governor of Xu province.
Jia Biao applied the law with the utmost rigour, applying the same penalty [against those who abandoned their children] as to murderers.
Because Cao Cao was in the north, however, Sun Quan felt that heneeded all the fighting men he could find, so he did not follow theiradvice.
The enemy had constructed their camp from grass and bushes. As a strong wind came on to blow, Huangfu Song ordered his troops to mount the walls with tinder-grass in their hands. He sent a forward party of his strongest to travel by hidden paths to the outside of the siege-lines, where they lit great fires and sounded their battle cry. The men on the walls raised torches in reply, and Huangfu Song led a sortie from the city with drums and shouts. As they charged the enemy lines, the rebels were terrified and fled in disorder.
Yuan Shao sent Qu Yi against them with eight hundred good soldiers, while a thousand Strong Bowmen supported his advance from either side.
Yuan Shu appointed his younger cousin Yuan Yin as Admini strator of Danyang, a
Orders were given that the Three Excellencies should sent in lists of senior officials who had been oppressive and extortionate, and they should be dismissed.
In the eleventh month the Grand Commandant Liu Chong left office.The Minister Coachman Guo Xi of Fugou [in Chenliu] became Grand Commandant.
King Cao of WEI sent the General and Chief Commissioner Cao Hong to face them.
"You were invited to take an appointment and have turned it down," said the messenger. "Nothing was said about shifting the capital, yet you raise the matter. Why is this?"
and an edict was issued to reprimand Chen Fan and Yang Bing most severely;they were dismissed and banished to their home territories.Mu Mao and Shangguan Zi were each reduced two grades in rank and salary.
"I have only just arrived in a strange territory," replied Liu Bei,"and have not yet shown my grace and good faith. I cannot dothat."
Yuan Benchu [Yuan Shao] is a descendant of great officials. He was born at the capital and has always lived there. Zhang Mengzhuo [Zhang Miao] is an old man from Dongping. All he knows is the proper way to sit in a hall of audience, glancing neither to the left nor to the right. Kong Gongxu [Kong Zhou] has Pure Conversation and impressive talk, so eloquent he can bring withered things to life just by breathing on them.
Li Jue recruited as he marched, and by the time he came to Chang'an he had more than a hundred thousand men. He joined Fan Chou and Li Meng, former followers of Dong Zhuo, and laid siege to the city. The walls were too steep to be stormed, and the defences held out for eight days.
Summons were sent to Xun Shuang, Chen Ji, Han Rong and Shentu Pan, scholars of local reputation who had yet received no official rank.
Dong Zhuo also appointed the Master of Writing Han Fu as Governor of Ji province, the Palace Attendant Liu Dai as Inspector of Yen, and Kong Zhou of Chenliu as Inspector of Yu. Zhang Miao of Dongping became Administrator of Chenliu, and Zhang Zi of Yingchuan was Administrator of Nanyang.
In the summer, in the fifth month on the day jiaxu [13 Jul], last of the month, there was an eclipse of the sun.
"Furthermore, though Dong Zhuo was a villain, proud and overbearing, with no restraint or limit to his ambition, even he dared not [claim the throne].
When Liu Zhang, Governor of Yi province, heard that Cao Cao had captured Jing province, he sent his Attendant Officer Zhang Song to pay respects.
Later, the Excellency over the Masses Yuan Wei wanted to find a husband for his niece. When he saw Huang Yun, he sighed and said, "If only I had a son-in-law like him, that would be ideal."
Cao Cao pursued the Yellow Turbans to Jibei and they all surrendered to him. He gained more than three hundred thousand soldiers and over a million men and women. Choosing the best fighters among them, henamed them the Qingzhou troops.
The Assistant OfficerWang Lei of Guanghan hung himself upside down at the gates ofthe capital in protest, but Liu Zhang would not be moved.
Hou Cheng was angry and frightened. In the twelfth month on the day guiyou [7 Nov 198] HouCheng, Song Xian, Wei Xu and other officers kidnapped ChenGong and Gao Shun and brought their forces to surrender.
Trodden down by men and horses, they sank into the mud and a whole mass of them died together.
In this year there was opened for the first time a market for the sale of offices at the Western Quarters. Each person appointed gave money in accordance with the position.For an office with salary and rank at Two Thousand shi, the fee was twenty million cash; for rank and salary at Four Hundred shi, the fee was four million cash. When a man particular virtue was appointed, he was assessed only half the amount, and some people paid only a third. A store house was established in the Western Garden to hold the proceeds.
Yuan the Chariots and Cavalry General is bringing his army eastwards, and we cannot be sure of his intentions.
Up to this time Qing province had been prosperous, and well protected by armed men. Whenever Jiao He caught sight of the rebels, however, he would always retreat, and he had never tried the winds and dust of campaigning or the clash of banners and drums in battle.
Yuan Shao gained people's affections by hisleniency, and if his two sons can agree and maintain the inheritancethey will be a source of endless trouble.
Liu Yan shifted his administration to Mianzhu, settled the unrest, and was careful to act generously and to obtain the support of the people.
By this means, the cause of peace and harmony will flourish, and generous treatment of one's own flesh and blood will be maintained.
and while Sun Ce was still in his teens, he had already made friends with well-known men.
The women of the harem, however, are now more than a thousand;can their numbers be reduced?
In the autumn, in the seventh month on the day jiazi [12 Aug] the emperor came to Luoyang, where he took up lodgings in the mansion of the former Regular Attendant Zhao Zhong.
Mi Fang and Shi Ren were both resentful of the casual way Guan Yu treated them. When he went off with the army, however, he left them in charge of transport. Supplies then failed to arrive on time. "When I get back, I shall deal with them," said Guan Yu.
Your majesty is loving and virtuous, generous and forgiving; you cannot bear to be too strict, so your eunuch servants usurp power and your loyal ministers are unable to come forward.
Those chosen to stay were quite content, and the ones told off to go did not dare object.
In fear and dread, Zhang Rang and the others clasped fingers, bowed twice and kowtowed towards the emperor, "Now we must die. May Your Majesty maintain yourself." They threw themselves into the river and drowned.
In the autumn, in the seventh month Cao Cao led the attack on MaChao and the others.
In the twelfth month on the day jisi [30 Dec] the emperor returned from Chang'an.
Xu Zhi was a man from a poor family. He worked in the fields, and would ate only food which he had grown through his own labours. He was respectful and frugal, honest and self-effacing, and all his neighbours admired his virtue. He was frequently invited to take up a post in the offices of the excellencies, but he would never accept.
Because of their upright conduct, Shen Pei of Wei commandery and Tian Feng of Julu had both failed to realise their ambitions under Han Fu. Yuan Shao appointed Tian Feng as his Attendant Officer and Shen Pei as Headquarters Officer. Xu You and Pang Ji of Nanyang, with Xun Shen of Yingchuan, all became councillors.
Cao Cao chose good men as aides for all his sons, and he appointed Xing Yong as Assistant of the Household to Cao Zhi. Xing Yong was punctilious on matters of ceremony,
He lit a fire in the night as a signal to the city, and thepeople in the city lit another fire in reply.
"Even though Jizhou [Yuan Shang] 12 may act insolently andfail to conduct himself as a younger brother, a generous ruler shouldnonetheless bend his will, humble himself, and concentrate onbringing affairs to success.
The message I carried was not flattering to you, and I fear you would not have been pleased to hear it. So I did not come forward.
News of his exploit came to Cao Cao's army, but Cao Cao justlaughed and said, "It is not just a matter of getting in. He has yet tocome out again!"
The same night that Xiahou Dun arrived, however, he executed several dozen men who had planned rebellion, and the army was settled.
Liu Yu had previously been Inspector of You province, the barbarians and the people had admired his grace and honesty, and so he was given the post.
I believe we can arrange an acceptable transfer of power which would still protect your noble house."
Yuan Shao wrote to Cao Cao, and his words were proud andcontemptuous.
Then Fan Pang went south to his home in Runan, and when the leading men of the commandery came out to welcome him their carriages were numbered in the thousands. Yin Tao and Huang Mu, men from his native village, acted as guards at his side, and helped in receiving his guests.
"Furthermore, if you delay matters, there will be changes. The example of Yin is not far off. You must make your mind up soon."
In the twelfth month on the day dingsi [7 Jan 179] the Household Counsellor Qiao Xuan became Grand Commandant.
You should cultivate virtue and reduce punishments, and you may then obtain the full blessings of the Zhongsi Ode.
Those bandits who had lost their families came back and askedto surrender, but Zheng Hun told them to bring some more women, held by other bandits, before he returned them their own.
Summons were sent to Xun Shuang, Chen Ji, Han Rong and Shentu Pan, scholars of local reputation who had yet received no official rank.
and the clothing and food for his wife and family were sufficient and no more.
When they reached Jiangzhou they defeated and captured Yan Yan, Administrator of Ba commandery.
I ask that you maintain my commission just one month more; then I shall certainly bring the wolves and owls to acknowledge their wickedness."
In the summer, in the fourth month the Yellow River ran clear in Jiyin, Dong commandery, Jibei and Pingyuan.
Indeed, I am afraid the day may suddenly come when a few corvée labourers or helpless artisans will rise up from the work-place where they have been held confined, will cast aside their tools and bare their arms for battle, will climb up high andcall out afar;and then all the people who are angry and distressed will respond to them like the gathering of cloud.
The Master of Writing Lu Zhi wrote in to say: "Many men of the Proscribed Party are innocent of any crime. They would benefit from an amnesty, and that would redress the wrong which has been done them."
When his army is destroyed he will have to withdraw to the north, and in this way the power of Jing [under Liu Bei] and of Wu [under Sun Quan] will be greatly increased: we can balance Cao Cao like the legs of a tripod cauldron.
An officer told their mother about it, and she replied, "It is the oldest person in the household who has responsibility. I am the one to take the blame."
The Shibao prophecies are superstitious, apocryphal works. How can one trust them?"
Liu Zhang added to Liu Bei's troops and supplied himgenerously with provisions and equipment. Then he sent him toattack Zhang Lu and gave orders that he should also take [433]command of the army already at Boshui.
Now the rebels are in JiaXin's hands, and I, your aged servant, request that you take noaction in this.
With her two elder brothers, she quietly made plans to prepare a hiding place for Li Xie.They spread it abroad that he had returned to the capital, and everyone believed the story.
In the ninth month the barbarians of Jiangxia made a rebellion. The provincial and commandery forces attacked and pacified them.
Li Jue wanted to make an alliance with Yuan Shu, so he appointed him General of the Left and enfeoffed him as Marquis of Yangdi, granting him the Staff of Authority.
Their authority affects the whole of the world, their honour and prestige have no limit, and members of their families all flourish in office.
"All the same, at present I hold a fief of four counties with apension from thirty thousand households; what have I done todeserve so much? Since the rivers and lakelands of the south are notyet settled, I cannot leave my post, but I can certainly give up mycities and lands. I therefore hand back the three counties of Yang xia, Zhe and Ku, with twenty thousand households, keeping onlythe income from ten thousand households in Wuping. This way, Ireduce the opportunity for rumour and slander, and I relieve myselfof some responsibilities."
Yu Fan, Officer of Merit in Kuaiji, said to his AdministratorWang Lang, "Sun Ce is a brilliant [198] military commander. Betterleave now; do not try to face him."
He found Xu Xuan guilty, sentenced him to public execution and had his corpse displayed afterwards.
Trained soldiers were raised from the empire,11 and the General of the Household of the North Lu Zhi was sent to attack Zhang Jue. HuangfU Song, as General of the Household on the Left, and the General of the Household on the Right Zhu Jun were sent to attack the Yellow Turbans of Yingchuan.
And if only an understanding ruler had appeared at that time to support them, then the fortune of Han might yet be maintained without limit or measure.
When Jia Cong reached his territory, he enquired about the reasons for the rebellion. Everyone told him, "The taxation requirements were far too heavy and took everything the people had.
but Xun Yusaid, "Yuan Shao has just been defeated, and his followers will beunhappy. You should take advantage of his difficulties and settlewith him for good.
Cao Cao led his troops west into the mountains against Poison's base camp.
In the spring, in the second month the Xianbi raided Yanmen.
"The Palace Attendant and Deputy Director of the SecretariatZhong Yao is clever and a fine strategist. If you trust him with thewest, you will have nothing to worry about."
At this time the Regular Attendant Guan Ba, a man of considerable talent, had arbitrary authority within the palace. Dou Wu first reported [against him] and had him arrested, together with the Regular Attendant Su Kang and some others. All were found guilty and put to death.
The Minister of Ceremonies Chen Dan of Donghai became Grand Commandant.
Yuan Hong was a great-great grandson of Yuan An.He would mortify his flesh as a means to maintain his conduct, and he would respond to no recommendations or summons.
Some time before this, Tao Qian had appointed Zhai Rong as Chancellor of Xiapi and sent him to take charge of the official grain transport from Guangling, Xiapi and Pengcheng.
Will your majesty say what sort of a man is Xu You? asked Du Xi.
Zhuge Liang saw Sun Quan at Chaisang and said to him, "All within the seas is in confusion. You have raised soldiers east of the Yangzi, Liu Yuzhou [Liu Bei] has collected an army south of the Han, and together we are fighting Cao Cao for the empire.
In the eighth month on the day jiachen [27 Sep] the emperor went to Xinfeng.
Wang Yun had always treated Lü Bu well, and Lü Bu told Wang Yun how Dong Zhuo had nearly killed him. So Wang Yun told him about the plan against Dong Zhuo, and asked him to act as agent on the inside.
So the bandits let them both go, and only took their clothes and their goods.
When hereturned he praised the emperor and the virtue of Lord Cao, andurged Liu Biao to send his sons to enter service.
It would be much better to pardon him and give him appointment as administrator in some commandery. Yuan Shao will be glad to escape punishment and will certainly cause no trouble."
In the winter, in the tenth month the barbarians of Wuling rebelled and raided Jiangling [capital of Nan commandery].Li Su, the Administrator of Nan commandery, ran away.His Registrar Hu Shuang seized the bridle of his horse and protested, "The barbarians can see that the commandery has no preparations for defence against them, so they are only too eager to take advantage of such an opportunity, and they will certainly attack."
Keeping their attentionthere, he quietly sent Xu Huang and Zhu Ling, with [424] four thousand horse and foot, over the Puban Crossing to establish abridgehead west of the Yellow River.
When people came to open a lawsuit, he would tell themwhat was right and what was wrong, then send them back to think itover; so the elders of the people blamed themselves for any quarrel,and they no longer enjoyed going to law.
"Now the Imperial University and the Eastern Lodge are quite enough to maintain scholarship and sagely cultivation. I ask that selection through the [School at the Gate of the] Vast Capital be abolished. This would remove the scandal from the empire."
"Honour and shame are the essence of reward and punishment.
Cao Cao said to Jia Xu, "ChengYu is braver than Meng Ben or Xia Yu."
Even so, I still have hope. Can you tell if I may ever be successful?"
Huan Jie of Changsha, who had been recommended by Sun Jian as Filial and Incorrupt, went to Liu Biao to ask for Sun Jian's body. Liu Biao admired his sense of honour and approved the request.
There was a pause, the enemy approached in greater numbers, and somesplit off to go for the baggage.
Ren Lan of Rongyang was a close friend of Wei Feng,
Before this, when Wang Yu was Director of Retainers he allied himself to the eunuchs, and he had sought some favour of Zhang Huan, who was at that time Minister of Ceremonies. Zhang Huan refused him, and so Wang Yu accused Zhang Huan of Faction. Zhang Huan was proscribed from office [and returned to his own estates].
"Don't you want to defeat him?" asked Xu You. "Why won'tyou tell the truth?"
So Jiang Xu made plans with Zhao Ang and Yin Feng of hisown [Hanyang] commandery and with Li Jun of Wudu for a jointattack on Ma Chao. He also sent men to Ji city to make contact withLiang Kuan of Anding and Zhao Qu of Nan'an, to have them act asallies within.
According to ancient regulations, the relatives of servants in the palace are not permitted to occupy official posts or hold power [in the regular government structure].At the present time, however, kinsmen and clients [of eunuchs] are being openly appointed to office, and some young men without experience have been given important positions.Everyone is angry and resentful, and all the empire is anxious and perturbed.
Now you want to make a surprise attack on people a thousand li away.If you have too much baggage it will be difficult to move swiftly enough. The enemy will hear of it and will certainly be ready for you.
but Liu Biao attacked Zhang Yi and also Lingling and Guiyangand conquered all of them.
The capital is a long way away and no-one heard their complaints. The people had nothing to live on and that is why they have gathered together as rebels."
Liang Xing, a bandit from Fu, plundered [Zuo]pingyi. All thecounty officials were afraid: they moved their offices to the shelterof the commandery city, and many felt they should go somewhereeven more secure in order to escape him.
I would wish that your majesty respect the influence of the moral teaching of Youyu [the sage Emperor Shun],and take thought of the reminders offered by the Kaifeng Ode on the gentle treatment which is owed to a mother.
The men and the horses in the city were several thousand, but the fortifications stood only a few feet above the water.
Xun You said, "Despite all the activity elsewhere, Liu Biao hasdone nothing but hold his position between the Yangzi and the Han.It is clear that he has no broader ambitions. The Yuan, on the otherhand, hold the territory of four provinces, with almost half a millionmen under arms.
Liu Ba closed his gates and excused himself on grounds of ill health.
The Excellency over the Masses Sheng Yun left office.The Minister of Finance Chong Gao became Excellency over the Masses.
Before this, Liu Zhang had appointed Xu Jing as Administrator of Shu commandery.
Sun Quan wrote to King Cao of WEI, requesting permission to attack Guan Yu with his own forces, but asking he keep it secret so that Guan Yu would have no opportunity to prepare against him.
Enemy scout-riders saw it, and they really believed the great army had gone away.
Hu Cai wanted to attack Han Xian, but the emperor sent explicit orders to forbid him.
Inadequate and worn-out as I am, I humbly await instructions.
On the day renzi [miswritten for renwu, 10 Feb] Cao Cao killedDong Cheng, Wang Fu, Chong Ji and all their families.
The Administrator of Luling, Sun Fu, was afraid Sun Quan wouldnot be able to hold the east of the Yangzi, and he sent men in secretwith letters to call Cao Cao.
Then Jia Xu went, Zhang Xiu treated him with the courtesyowed by a son or grandson, and Duan Wei did indeed look after hisfamily well. [209]
Cao Cao heard about this and appointed Sima Yi to office, but Sima Yi sought to excuse himself by claiming he had rheumatism.
An imperial edict had appointed Hu Mao of Yingchuan as Inspector, and Liu Zhang's officers Shen Mi, Lou Fa and Gan Ning rebelled and attacked Liu Zhang. They gained, however, no success, and fled to Jing province.
Then provinces and commanderies set up farming officesone after another and the granaries were filled.
In ancient times, when the state of Xing was without the true Way, the state of Wey attacked it, and good rains fell as the army went forward.I have been urging our troops on all this summer, and we have regularly received good rains, the harvest is abundant and plentiful and the people have no sickness or ills.
"At the time of the amazing military energy of the Epochal Ancestor [Emperor Wu of Former Han], generals and commanders were fine and fierce while government wealth and taxation were full and abundant. They campaigned far and wide, but within a few decades the officials and people were exhausted and there was regret for the former policy.
"In former times Emperor Xiaoxuan assembled Confucianists at the Stone Canal Pavilion, and Emperor Zhang gathered scholars in the White Tiger Hall. They made a comprehensive analysis to explain the meaning of the classics. These were great and excellent affairs, representing the true Way of action for both [the sage kings] Wen and Wu [of Zhou], and they should be followed.
Yuan Yi fled to Pei, where he was killed by soldiers.
"The best thing is to go to Lord Cao," replied Jia Xu
An edict abolished the three reign-titles Guangxi, Zhaoning and Yong-Han [so the year was once more identified as the sixth of Zhongping].
Wen Chou and Liu Bei, commanders of Yuan Shao's cavalry,came up together with five or six thousand horsemen.
but at that time no-one would agree with him, save only Xu Shu of Yingchuan.
An imperial edict sent the Internuncio Feng Shan to persuade the rebel Qiang scattered about in Hanyang to surrender.
Since Qian Zhao had held command of the Wuhuan for the Yuanfamily, Cao Cao now sent him to Liucheng to keep the barbariansunder control.
Liu Bei would not agree, however, explaining that, "I am just now making plans for Liang province. When that territory is settled, I shall return you the whole of Jing province."
Sun Shao the son of Sun He, seventeen years old, had collected theremnant of Sun He's forces to hold camp at Jing city.
As soon as Sun Jian received it he led his troops against Wang Rui.
Furious, Zhang Fei ordered his attendants to lead Yan Yan out and cut off his head.
Cao Cao sent a letter to Sun Quan, asking him to send a son ashostage.
Yang Biao realised that the house of Han was weak and indecline, and government was now in Cao Cao's hands. He pretendedto be suffering from cramps, and for more than ten years he did notwalk. So he avoided further trouble.
Sun Quan sent the Colonel Liang Yu to take in tribute,and he sent back Zhu Guang and others.He also sent a letter describinghimself as subject to Cao Cao, and urging the question of the Mandate of Heaven.
Alas! One may live so long, but what is there to hope for?
On the day bingshen [28 Feb], last of the month, there was an eclipse of the sun.
Zhang Ziqian, a man from Ji province who had surrenderedearlier, had long been an enemy of Shen Pei. He laughed at him, "Ihave done better than you, Zhengnan."
During the night, they chose several thousand, had eachcarry a white flag, and sent them off from three gates to surrender.
"Outwardly Yuan Shao acts generously, but privately he isjealous. He uses men but he is suspicious of them, and heappoints only the sons and kinfolk of his own or his wife'sfamilies. Outwardly you are easy and simple, but inside you areclever and shrewd. You use men and trust them. It is only theirability that matters and you pay no attention to relationship.This is the superiority of a liberal mind.
Yan Rou of Yan state had earlier been generous and faithful, and he became Major to the Wuhuan. Recruiting several ten thousand barbarians and Han Chinese, Yan Rou fought a battle to the north of Lu against Zou Dan, the Administrator of Yuyang appointed by Gongsun Zan. He took the head of Zou Dan and killed four thousand of his men.
In the precedents of Han, there is no subject from which the Three Excellencies are debarred."
Many of them have joined Han Sui's army, but they will certainly come back to help their femilies.
had privately solicited a bribe of fifty million cash and Huangfu Song refused to give it.
Sun Quan was besieging Hefei. His forces had surrounded the cityfor a long time, but it did not fall.
This matter had to pass for checking through the offices of the excellencies, and the Grand Commandant Chen Fan protested: "The men being investigated are some of the most popular and celebrated men of the empire. They are loyal and patriotic ministers, with merits worthy of pardon over ten generations.
Before this, several of the emperor's children had died young. When the Empress He gave birth to a son Liu Bian, he was brought up at the house of a Taoist named Shi Zimiao, and he was called Lord Shi.
There was a saying in the capital that "The father was unwilling to set up emperors, the son was unwilling to set up a king."
Then, while Cao Cao was facing Yuan Shao and had noopportunity to help him,
and since Shi Huang the Administrator of Cangwu had diedabout this time, he also sent Wu Ju to take his place.
The Gentleman of the Palace, Yuan Zhu of Runan, who was aged nineteen, went to the palace gates and sent in a letter which said, "Like the cycle of the four seasons, good work comes to its fulfilment and then declines,and it is rare that high rank and great favour do not bring misfortune [upon those who hold them too long].
"Excellent!" said Cao Cao, and he promised peace to Yuan Tan.
When he was young he was orphaned and poor, and he and his mother made a living by peddling shoes. He was seven feet and five inches tall, his hands hung below his knees, he could glance around and see his ears.He was a man of great ambitions but few words, and whether he was pleased or angry it did not show in his expression.
Xun You was very quiet, but he was wise and prudent. He had always followed Duke Cao of WEI on his campaigns, and made plans with him in his tent, but no-one, not even his sons and nephews, ever knew what was said.
In this year Hede, younger uncle of the King of Shule, killed the king and took the throne for himself.
"Yuan Shao and Cao Cao are presently at peace," observed his comrades, "and Zang Hong holds his appointment through Yuan Shao.He will not upset the good [relations between Yuan and Cao] and bring down misfortune [by such involvement]."
"I have orders to execute you," replied Sun Jian. "What is my crime?" asked Wang Rui.
At that time Zhang Shuo, younger brother of the Junior Attendant of the Yellow Gates Zhang Rang, was magistrate of Yewang. He was greedy, cruel and completely immoral, but he feared Li Ying's strict authority and so he fled back to the capital and hid in a secret chamber within Zhang Rang's house.
The men whom he trusts with office and treats as his friends are no more than persuasive flatterers. Those whom he favours andhonours are none but the kinfolk of his empress or of his various concubines. They burn up the riches of the empire and they cut the bone and marrow from living people.
I shall follow my lord of Longshu to the Yellow Springs.Those who live and those who die each have their appointed place.
Dong Zhuo spoke with the emperor, but could gain no clear account of what had happened. Then he talked to the King of [19] Chenliu and asked about the causes of the misfortune and disorder. The king described events from first to last, with nothing left out,
Theleaders of the Yi group, Chen Pu and Zu Shan, with followers numbering twenty thousand families, were camped in the Linli Hills.There were cliffs on four sides that could not be attacked and the army was held there for a full month.
Withsoldiers holding them down, however, those who wish to stay loyalhave no leader. It is only natural that they are frightened, so theylisten to Wei Gu. Wei Gu and his men have seized power,
When Yuan Shao became leader of the alliance [against Dong Zhuo] he behaved arrogantly and Zhang Miao spoke straight and told him so. Yuan Shao was angry and told Cao Cao to kill him,
When Chong Gao came to the place where the army was camped, the first thing he did was to announce the grace and good faith [of the imperial government], to encourage the barbarians to surrender.He promised that he would attack only those who failed to submit, and he sent back all Qiang prisoners who had been held as hostages by the commandery and county offices.Those who had proved loyal were well and gently treated, and rewards were granted clearly and reliably.As a result, the Qiang and the northern barbarians all came to offer their submission.
In the twelfth month on the day renshen [20 Jan 168] Liu Kui, King of Yingtao, was re-established as King of Bohai.
Guo Tai saw him and said, "You have high ability, surpassing other men and quite enough to gain you wealth and power.
Chen Deng the Administrator of Guangling led the troops of hiscommandery as advance guard for Cao Cao, and came to Xiapi.
the Annals of Emperor Xian.Chuping 4: 193 AD 19 February 193 - 8 February 194
Sun Ce brought his army forward and Hua Xin received him ina headdress of fine cloth.
Sun Jian replied, "Dong Zhuo opposes Heaven and defies the law. Until I have killed you and all your clan, and shown your heads to the four seas, I shall not be able to die in peace. How can there be alliance with you?"
Dong Zhuo's sons, even those still in the arms of maidservants and concubines, were enfeoffed as marquises and played with gold seals and purple ribbons.
In the autumn, in the seventh month on the day bingwu [9 Aug], the Empress Liang died.
Liu Yao fought with Sun Ce, but his men were defeated and fled to Dantu.
The Palace Attendant Liu Ai saw fires flare up one after another, and he asked the emperor to choose one of the camps as a refuge.
When Cao Cao was young he was clever and ingenious and could adapt himself to any situation, but he sometimes took the law into his own hands, and he was casual or frivolous, paying little attention to his duties.
Guo Tai understood all types of men, he enjoyed praising or admonishing them, and he would travel about the commanderies and kingdoms.
When Cao Cao took the royal title, Yang Xun published a eulogy of his achievements and virtue.
Xiahou Dun reported all this to Cao Cao, who sighed and realised Tian Chou would never yield. He made him a Consultant.
When officials are appointed at a time of weakness, there is no competent selection, but there are increasingly restrictive regulations and increasingly detailed prohibitions and precautions. When a man does well, he fails to receive his proper reward because of some technicality, and when another does evil, he escapes his due punishment through legal trickery. High and low, everyone is exhausted and confused, and the world is in disorder.
He agreed to accept just one large coin from each of them.
All replied, "That is not possible."
Sun Ce made his preparations and marched to Qiantang. ChenYu, however, planned a surprise attack on Sun Ce, and he was insecret contact with Zu Lang, White Tiger Yan and others, to havethem act as his allies behind the lines.
and he sent Kuai Yue to trick the clan leaders to come to him. Fifty-five men arrived, and they were all beheaded and their followers taken over.
Close companions receive fief cities without good cause, attendants are handed rewards without good work, and within a single family there may be several men with marquisates.In this way the patterns of nature lose their true measure, and the Yin and the Yang fall into disarray.
I spoke to you, said Cao Cao, "but you did not answer. Why not?"
Liu Yu and Gongsun Zan had long been on bad terms. Gongsun Zan had often attacked Yuan Shao, and though Liu Yu forbade him he could not enforce his orders. He therefore reduced the supplies sent to Gongsun Zan.
Sun Jian rode fast during the night to see Yuan Shu, drew on the ground to show his plans, and said, "The reasons I have taken service with you are that above I am attacking a rebel for the emperor, while below I give some help to your family in a private feud.
He accompanied the messenger to Cao Cao's army, he was named magistrate of Tiao,and he went with the army to Wuzhong.
When the scouts saw Zhou Yu's ships appear, they hastened to tell him.Liu Bei sent men to welcome them,
The Colonel Dian Wei fought against Zhang Xiu. Almost allthe men about him were killed or wounded, and he himself was hit ascore of times.
Cao Cao was unsuccessful in his attack on Tan, but he stormed and massacred Qulü, Suiling and Xiaqiu. The cities were laid waste, no-one was left alive, and even the chickens and dogs were gone.
Then Tian Chou proclaimed his code. Those who killed or wounded one another, those who robbed and those who quarrelled should answer for their fault according to its severity. The heaviest penalty was death. Altogether there were some twenty articles.
Cao Cao's father Cao Song was the adopted son of the Regular Attendant Cao Teng. There is no way to tell his family origins, although some said he was a member of the Xiahou clan.
In former times the wet-nurse Zhao Rao was honoured before all the empire, but she was a slanderer and a flatterer and displayed excessive pride. Then there was the case of Huo Yu, servant at the gate of the Palace of Perpetual Joy, who relied upon his influence with authority, and was constantly involved in wrongful dealings.
Tadun, the Wuhuan of Liaoxi, was particularly powerful and had been very well-treated by Yuan Shao. Yuan Shang and his brothers therefore turned to him for support, and he made several incursions across the borders in hope of helping Yuan Shang regain his former territory.
They stayed seven days, and the men from SHU that came to surrender reported that, "There are scores of alarms every day, and though the officers on guard behead the [493] troublemakers they cannot set the people at peace."
"I beg that you give publicity to my humble submission, to let it be known to the hundred officials that punishment must be meted out with justice and equity.
Then Xu Huang and his fellows became angry, and they raised again the former questions [of the slanders against Huangfu Gui].He was sent down for judicial enquiry.
When Sun Jian went away on campaign he left his family at Shouchun,
Lü Bu had only threethousand infantry and four hundred horse, and he was afraid hecould not deal with them. He said to Chen Gui, "This is your work,to bring on Yuan Shu's army. What shall I do now?"
Yuan Shang gave him a few soldiers andsent Pang Ji to stay with him.
Gan Ning said to Zhang Zhao, "Our ruler has given you position like [Emperor Gao of Former Han gave to] Xiao He.If all you can do is sit and worry about rebellions, how will you compare to the men of ancient time?"
Jian'an 2: 197 AD
As soon ashe left, however, Zhao Qu and Liang Kuan barred the gates of thecity and killed all his family.
When the Imperial Clerk Raolong Zong went to Dong Zhuo to make a report, he failed to take off his sword. He was immediately flogged to death.
Yuan Shu retreated first to Xiangyi and then to Ningling.
In the eleventh month the Excellency of Works Liu Chong left office.
In this memorial, you have gone beyond your proper authority and discuss the affairs of the emperor's personal staff. By what precedent, either in classical texts or the regulations of Han, do you justify this? We ask that the minister reply in detail." Yang Bing sent in his answer, "The Zuo Chronicle of the Spring and Autumn Annals says, 'charged to remove the danger to my ruler, I regarded nothing but how I might be able to do it.'
Then Cao Cao attacked and defeated Tao Qian, and the territory of Xu had no peace. Zhai Rong led ten thousand men and women to Guangling, where the Administrator Zhao Yu received him with the courtesy of a guest.
That night Zhou Yu spoke again with Sun Quan, and said,"Whenthose men saw Cao Cao's letter about eight hundred thousand soldiers and sailors, they were all afraid, and the advice they offered was given without any thought whether the figures were true or he was simply boasting. It was quite pointless.
So Guan Yu felt quite easy in his mind. He had no further cause for suspicion, and he drew more and more soldiers away to Fan.
Lü Meng sent Companions morning and evening to ask after old people, enquiring what they might lack. He gave medicine to the sick, and clothing and food to the hungry and cold.
your servants were fearfill as if Heaven and Earth were felling. We beg you to take this as warning for a lifetime."
So Cao Cao recommended Sun Quan as General Who Exterminates Caitiffs, with command as Administrator of Kuaiji.
Qiao Xuan then advised the emperor that "Whenever there is a kidnapping any-where in the empire, the offenders should always be killed. It is not permissible for ransoms to be paid in money or goods; that just opens the way to further crime."
When Guan Yu attacked Fan, Lü Meng sent in a memorial, "Guan Yu is driving north, but he has left a strong guard behind. He is naturally concerned that I may threaten his rear.
Now that Yuan Shao had overcome Gongsun Zan he became stillmore proud and confident, and his tribute to the emperor was in frequent and small.
Cao Cao laughed and said, "If I bind a tiger I must bind himtightly,"
Such tactics, argued Guo Huai, "will only show weakness, and will not give us a sufficiently strong position against the enemy. This is not a good plan.
He [417] divided Yuzhang to create Poyang commandery, andChangsha to form Hanchang commandery. Cheng Pu returned asAdministrator of Jiangxia, while Lu Su became Administrator ofHanchang and camped at Lukou.
In the sixth month there was great rain and hail in [You]fufeng.
When the memorial came in, the Masters of Writing in the Imperial Secretariat summoned the clerks in Yang Bing's office and reprimanded them, "In the organisation of government and the demarcations of responsibility, each has its own areas of concern.
Liu Yan was made Governor of Yi province, the Minister Coachman Huang Wan became Governor of Yu province, and the Minister of the Imperial House Liu Yu of Donghai became Governor of You province.
He encouraged the planting of mulberry trees and gave adviceon rearing cattle, and every family became prosperous and wealthy.
Those recommended as Filial and Incorrupt by senior officials should be gentlemen selected according to the highest standards. Recently, however, the imperial summons has been issued without sufficient care, and there has been occasion to reprimand the Three Excellencies on this account. Now, moreover, there is selection and accelerated promotion based upon skill in these minor literary forms. This opens the opportunity for private favouritism, and it ignores the prescriptions of all enlightened rulers. The hearts of the multitude cannot accept this system, but none dare voice an objection.
Cao Cao recommended Ma Teng as Minister of the Guards, while his son Ma Chao was appointed a Lieutenant-General with full command of his forces. All his family and dependents, however, were moved to Ye.
Some thousand of the remaining bandits wanted to surrender.Those in council said, "The Duke has established a custom: there isno pardon granted to enemies who surrender only after they havebeen surrounded."
"I am the one to plan this campaign," replied Cao Cao, "not theenemy.
Liu Bei stayed at Ye for amonth, and the men he had lost gradually returned to him.
You are not yet strong enough to restrain him, and you will only make trouble for yourself if you try.
Sun Quan was touched, but he said, "If I leave him to you,
"Then your majesty accepted the slanders against Cai Yong: you had him suffer punishment, with his family and household, old and young driven far away. Surely this was turning away from a loyal subject!
Liu Zhang sent the General of the Household Pang Xi toattack him, but when he had no success Liu Zhang appointed him asAdministrator of Ba commandery, to camp at Langzhong andoppose Zhang Lu. Pang Xi, on his own authority, recruited the Zongpeople of Hanchang as soldiers.
Du Xi, Zhao Yan and Po Qin, men of Yingchuan, had taken refugefrom the troubles and come to Jing province. Liu Biao treated allthree as his guests.
On various pretexts, he killed Wang Xian and Li Quan and a dozen others, the strongest and most influential men of the province, and so established a punitive authority.
The Regular and Yellow Gate attendants all went to He Jin and apologised, assuring him they were at his service. "
"Now that I know I shall be blamed in this way, I realise that I face instant death. I ask only five days more, to destroy and eliminate the sources of evil. Then I can readily accept even the punishment of being boiled alive. This is my life's desire."
The eunuchs had long resented the Dou family. So they took the dowager's body in a clothing cart to the market-place in the south of the city and left it in a shed there for several days.Cao Jie and Wang Fu wanted to have the funeral ceremonies carried out with rituals suitable for an Honoured Lady.
In the morning they cannot be sure of the evening, and the people have no means to sustain their lives. "On the other hand, should you fail to deal with them now anddecide to wait another year, then next harvest there may be grain,and your enemies will have recognised their errors. They willreform their government and revive their power, so you will havelost the chance to use your soldiers.
He raised Chen Gui's salary to Fully Two Thousand shi, andappointed Chen Deng Administrator of Guangling.
When Chen Deng cameback, Lü Bu was angry. He took up a halberd and chopped the table,saying, "Your father persuaded me to join Cao Cao and to break offthe marriage with Gonglu [Yuan Shu]. Now my request has notbeen granted but you and your father have both done splendidly.You sold me out."
Li Fu broke his staff of authority, tied it at the side of his horseand put on a flat-topped cap. Taking three horsemen with him, hewent by night towards Ye. Styling himself [327] a Chief Controller,he passed through the north of the siege, following signs towardsthe east. Every so often he would find fault with officers and menon sentry duty and punish them accordingly,
Liu Bei went back and set his capital at Chengdu. He appointed Xu Jing as Grand Tutor,Fa Zheng became Director of the Secretariat, Guan Yu became General of the Van, Zhang Fei became General of the Right, Ma Chao became General of the Left and Huang Zhong became General of the Rear. All his officers were granted some promotion.
The Master of Writing Liu Na said, "When a man is acting as a pillar of the state, but offers no support in time of danger, what use is he?"
Liu Ye argued, "Liu Bei is a hero among men and has the generosity of a ruler, but he has come a little late. He has held SHU for only a few days, and the people do not yet trust him.
Wealthy men paid their money first, but those who were poor could take up their appointments and pay double price later.
Then Fan Chou planned to take an army east out of the passes,and he asked Li Jue for additional troops.
Jian'an 3: 198 AD
anenemy on the defensive, he presents no cause for concern."
The Administrator of Jianwei, Ren Qi, and the Colonel Jia Long raised troops against him, but Liu Yan attacked and killed both of them.
On the day yiyou [10 Oct] the Grand Commandant Liu Yu was appointed Grand Marshal and enfeoffed as Marquis of Xiangfei.
If they can occupy a position with scarcely one chance in ten thousand of survival,then surely they have the courage to fight to the death.
When Shen Pei and the others saw Li Fu, they wept for joy,sounded the drums and called out "Ten thousand years!"
"If we consider the last rulers of the Three Dynasties, they were vicious and had no chastity: the Yang force was exhausted above, and the Yin force was isolated below. It was for this reason that the Duke of Zhou made the admonition: 'How few of them enjoyed a long career.'
Guanghe 光和 2: 179 AD
Unless you get Liu Yuchou,then the enemy will attack outside and the people will oppose youwithin, and that is the way to certain destruction.
Zijing [Lu Su] was introduced to me by Zhou Yu. I spoke with him at a banquet and he talked of the great plan for imperial rule. This was one thing that caused me pleasure.
He was extremely good at reforming by teaching.A man in Wang Lie's village stole some cattle, but when the owner caught him the robber confessed, saying, "I would ratheraccept the punishment of death, just so long as you do not tell Wang Yanfang."
When Lu Bu first came to Liu Bei he behaved with utmost courtesy,saying, "You and I are both men of the borders.
Lü Meng said generously, "Xi Su is a brave man who can offer good service, and he has come a long way to join us. In fairness we should increase his command, not take men away from him."
Before he could get there, however, the Inspector [of You province] Zhang Jing sent in a document of impeachment, claiming Kou Rong was planning to cross the frontier illegally.
The best thing to do is move west together, attack Chang'an and avenge Lord Dong.
When he [196] arrived hepresented a memorial on the faults of Han Xian and Zhang Yang.
When the officers saw the size of Han Sui's army, they wanted to build a stockade and a moat to fight on the defensive.
Guan Yu grantedhim a seal and gave him soldiers, and he came back as a bandit. In the area south from Xu city there were others who acted as allies to Guan Yu behind the lines.Guan Yu's power made central China tremble.
Liu Tao, a scholar of the University, spoke as follows:"The misfortunes of the present time are not caused by the currency. It is because the people are starving."
harnessing two enemies against each other, we sit and wait until they are weakened.
There he learned Liu Bei had already gonepast, so he led five thousand of his best cavalrymen in close pursuit. In a single day and night they covered more than three hundred li to the Chang Slope in Dangyang.
Hearing of Sun Ce's reputation, he came from Shu to visit him, and they became close friends. Zhou Yu urged Sun Ce to come to live in Shu, and when Sun Ce did
and since Ji province is one of the most powerful, none of the chiefs of other provinces will be able to rival you for the leading position."
A general council was held among the leaders east of the passes. It was observed that the emperor was young and weak, under thecontrol of Dong Zhuo. Far away and isolated by the passes, they did not even know whether he was still alive. Liu Yu, Governor of You province, was worthy and able and a member of the imperial clan.1It was therefore proposed that he be set up as ruler.
Several hundred men of Li Jue, armed with great halberds, were marching in front of the imperial carriage, and the two groups were about to fight when the Palace Attendant Liu Ai called out in a loud voice, "This is the Son of Heaven!"
Cao Cao was pleased and said to him, "In the misfortune at the YuRiver, even I was helpless and confused. But you kept control in theconfusion, you punished cruel robbers, and you have strengthenedour defences. You have consistently maintained honour and goodconduct. Could any of the most famous generals in the past havedone better?"
Now Cao Ren and his comrades are under heavy siege, observed Huan Jie. "Yet they have no hesitation in holding to the death. This is because your majesty shows strength for them at a distance.
At this time advisers wanted to distribute the famous estates about Chengdu among Liu Bei's officers,
In the winter, in the eleventh month WEI first established Mastersof Writing, Palace Attendants, and six ministers.
Cao Cao had suspicions about the people in the areas of Jing province which had been over-run [by Guan Yu] and also about those in the military colonies along the Han.He planned to shift all of them.
In recognition of his good work, Chen Deng was promoted GeneralWho Calms the Waves.
The Great Seal of State had been lost but all the other seals were recovered.
"When I have a master, I work for him. So if I hold appoint ment from the Son of Heaven, I can no longer serve [260] you to thedeath.
Before this, after the emperor had left Chang'an the General WhoProclaims Majesty Jia Xu gave up his seal and ribbon and went tostay with Duan Wei at Huayin.
He went on alone to attack them, leaving Dong Zhuo as rear-guard. In a series of engagements he completely defeated them, cutting off some ten thousand heads.
In the summer, in the fifth month on the day guiwei [?] the Ministerof the Guards Ma Teng was executed and all his family destroyed.
"In the winter of the year before last [Yanxi 7] it was extremely cold, so much that birds and animals were killed, fish and tortoises came to harm, and even some leaves of the bamboos and cypresses by the city wall were withered and dry.
Cao Cao asked Liu Ye, "Can we still attack them?" but Liu Ye replied, "They are already settling down again. You cannot attack."
The Three Excellencies deal with matters outside, the imperial clerks investigate matters within.
Speaking at the wrong time brings misfortune."
Cao Cao arrested Zhi Xi and was going to kill him, but then pardoned him.
Xun Yu told Cao Cao of this program, and Cao Cao followed it.
Liu Bei was furious. He summoned Yang Huai and Gao Pei,commanders of Liu Zhang's army at Boshui, charged them with lackof courtesy, and cut off their heads.
And as he does so, Yuan Tan willfollow at his heels. Attacking an enemy distressed and desperate,striking a rebel discouraged and weary, with your power it will belike strong wind moving the autumn leaves.
Dong Zhuo had not yet arrived, and matters of government large and small were left to Wang Yun.
He was at once reappointed Headquarters Officer, and his advice was sought on all military matters in Jing province.
His officersasked why, and he explained. "The land within the passes is verybroad. If each group of rebels kept to the difficult country and madeus attack him, it would take more than two years to settle them.
In the fifth month on the day bingxu [18 Jun] the Grand Commandant Yang Bing died.
He must be down-hearted. Armies take their leaders astheir guide: if the leader is discouraged then the army loses heart.
Yuan Shu was concerned, and he did not send supplies for the army.
Thirty thousand, replied Zhou Yu.
Others, who have planned rebellion or the greatest iniquities, yet receive pardon through an amnesty. What crimes have the men of Faction committed, that they alone should suffer your unrelieved anger?
"Now your ministers take the example of Cai Yong as a warning. On the one hand they are afraid they will suffer immeasurable difficulties in their public life, and they also fear they may suffer harm from some private assassin. I know that your court will not receive honest advice again!
Thehigh officials impeached him, for "Standing aloof against the right Way of action, and wilfully using this opportunity to establish a petty name for virtue. He should be dismissed and punished."
"If Cui Lie failed to realise the consequences of his policy, he is a fool. If he knows what he is saying, he is a traitor."
The Coachman of the Palace of Prolonged Joy, Hou Lan, was found guilty of luxury and arrogance, and of acting with arbitrary authority. Ordered to surrender his seal and ribbon of office, he killed himself.
Cao Cao had Xun Yu appointed as Palace Attendant withresponsibility as Director of the Secretariat.
Liu Xun was pleased, and everyone congratulated him, allexcept Liu Ye. Liu Xun asked him why. "Shangliao may be small," he replied, "but the walls are strongand the moat is deep. It is difficult to attack and easy to defend, andit will be at least ten days before we have any hope of taking it.
Li Shu the Administrator of Lujiang refused to submit to Sun Quanand several times took in fugitives and rebels against him.
In the eighth month the Grand Judge of WEI Zhong Yao became Chancellor of State.
It is obvious that his strength is almost exhausted. The decisivemoment is approaching, and this is the time to surprise him. Do notmiss your chance."
When Yuan Shao heard Cao Cao had attacked Chunyu Qiong, hesaid to his son Yuan Tan, "As Cao Cao is defeating Chunyu Qiong,I shall take his camp and he will have nothing to return to."
The [Director of the] Masters of Writing Xun Yu and the Director of Retainers Zhong Yao also believed Tian Chou should be allowed to refuse,
Yuan Shao's troops maintained their pursuit to Jie Bridge. Gongsun Zan regrouped his men to turn and fight, but Qu Yi again defeated him. They came to Gongsun Zan's camp and seized his standard,and the rest of his army took to flight.
Before this, the Southern Shanyu Yufuluo had come to power [among the Xiongnu], but the men of the state who had killed his father made rebellion and set up a Gudu Marquis of the Xubu clan as Shanyu.
Sun Ce sent men to behead him there, then went to Yuan Shu to apologise.
Yuan Shao, through He Jin's trusted client Zhang Jin, urged him to kill all the eunuch officials.
Xiahou Yuan chased after him towards Lueyang city. He was thirty li behind Han Sui, and his officers wanted to maintain the pursuit, but then someone suggested they should attack the Di barbarians of Xingguo.
Her elder brother Dong Chong was appointed Bearer of the Gilded Mace, and her nephew Dong Zhong became General of the Household for All Purposes.
and sent part of his army along theZhadu road against the camp at Gaoqian.
In the sixth month on the day gengchen [18 Jul] there was rain and hail, with the hailstones as big as hens' eggs.
The Administrator of Wuyuan Wang Zhi, however, a younger brother of Wang Fu, reported that Cai Yong had insulted the court, and Cai Yong fled to the Yangzi and the sea. He remained [in exile from the capital] for twelve years.Dong Zhuo knew his reputation and summoned him, but Cai Yong pleaded sick and would not come.
The Xianbi raided Jiuquan. The numbers of their people increased day by day, and there was no region of the border country which did not suffer from them.
When they came to battle, he placed the horse-drawn carriages at the front, and the lime was thrown up with a favouring wind. The enemy could not see.Then he set fire to the cloth [which had been tied to the horses' tails]. The horses were terrified, and fled into the midst of the enemy ranks.Then he had the war-chariots brought from the rear, bows and crossbows firing at random, while the sound of gongs and drums shook the air.Overwhelmed as if by waves, the enemy force was smashed and scattered; uncounted numbers were killed or wounded in the pursuit which followed. They took the heads of the leaders, and the whole commandery territory was now at peace.
The remainder of his men cried out, however, "Does our general abandon us?"
Taking up quarters in a simple hut, Huangfu Gui made regular inspection of his officers and men.All the troops appreciated his concern.
The Registrar was sent to receive Zhang Xi, and three sets ofmessengers were despatched,
The Dowager trusted them and issued a number of edicts of enfeoffment or appointment [at their behest].
and the Inspector of Yan province, Diwu Zhong, sent his Assistant Officer Wei Yu to investigate him.He discovered fifty or sixty million [cash] taken [by Shan Kuang].Diwu Zhong then reported against Shan Kuang, and extended the charge to implicate Shan Chao.
And you are the chief officer of the state, yet you have established an alliance with such a gang! How can you side with those rebels?"
So he marched, sending Zhang He as advance guard with five thousand horse and foot.
Just at this moment, Hedong is a key point in the empire.Can you suggest a reliable man to keep the place under control?"
Before this, He Jin had sent Zhang Yang of Yunzhong to go back to Bing province and raise troops. Soon afterwards He Jin came to grief, and Zhang Yang stayed in Shangdang with a force of several thousand men.
"Your majesty, however, has licentious girls and seductive women, the most beautiful in all the world. You delight in fine food and splendid wine, and you demand every luxury. How can you expect to emulate Huang-Lao?" When this memorial was sent in, Xiang Kai was summoned to the Imperial Secretariat to explain himself.
As Cen Zhi made his escape, all his family and friends joined to help conceal him. Only Jia Biao closed his door and refused to take him in. Some were angry with him,
Look at the way he speaks: he does not even pretend to courtesy towards you. He treats his superiors lightly and has no sense of respect. This [198] is one crime. Bian Zhang and Han Sui have defied the law for more than a year and now is the time to advance and punish the rebels, yet Dong Zhuo says we cannot go. He delays the army and makes the people uncertain. This is a second crime. Dong Zhuo holds an official position but has nothing to show for it, he waited a long time before he answered your summons, he acts with disrespect and holds himself high. This is the third crime.
Now the roads and streets are buzzing with gossip about a certain Lady Cheng; and if we examine her reputation then it is clear that she too will be a disaster for the state. At the highest level, a watchful guard should be established, with clear prohibitions. And at the same time we should be very careful of [such people as] Zhao Rao and Huo Yu, who constitute a notable danger.
The Master of Writing Fu Xuan said to He Kui, "Ding Yi has already brought harm to Mao Jie. You should show him somewhat more respect."
GongsunZan did not reply, but increased his preparations for defence. Hesaid to his Chief Clerk Guan Jing of Taiyuan, "Everywhere in theempire men are fighting like tigers. It is obvious that no-one canmaintain a siege against me for as long as a year. So what can YuanBenchu do?"
Then Cao Cao did agree upon a day for battle. He first sent out lighttroops to skirmish, and when they had fought for a time he let loosehis Tiger Cavalry to attack the enemy on both flanks and completelydefeated them. They took the heads of Cheng Yi, Li Kan and several others.
Yet now you extend consideration to Dong Zhuo and refrain from punishing him. This is where you will lose and destroy the authority of the law."
And later I took over in Yan province; and I destroyed orbrought to surrender three hundred thousand Yellow Turbans; and Iattacked the rebel Yuan Shu and caused him to die poor and ruined;and I destroyed Yuan Shao and exposed the heads of his two sons;and I also dealt with Liu Biao. "So I have pacified the empire.
"Furthermore, the terms of some officers appointed to these posts have been restricted to [a certain number of] months or years. The positions then lie vacant, the region for ten thousand l is desolate and empty, and there is no control of affairs.
You were right both times. How did you do it?"
"Those fellows, moreover, hold no authority from the emperor, and their ranks are in complete disorder. Each will rely upon his own strength, and store up resources till he can assess the situation.8 They will never agree on plans or co-operate in attack.
Should we behave like that, our wise scholars andmilitary men will become uncertain and may regret their choice of amaster. Who will remain with you to settle the empire? You mighthave eliminated the threat posed by a single man, but you wouldhave disappointed the hopes of [207] people everywhere. This is acritical decision, and you should think about it carefully.
Chen Fan sent a letter to criticise them, "The principles of the past require that duty be maintained even when the ruler dies.
Because she was pregnant, the emperor had interceded several times with Cao Cao on her behalf but without success.
Before this, because Guo Yuan's army was so large, all the officerswanted to abandon Pingyang.
Though our forces may be strong we shall achieve nothing if the wrong man holds command.
Xi Su, an officer of Yi province, brought his troops to surrender.Zhou Yu recommended that they be allocated to increase the command of Lü Meng, General of the Household Who Traverses Open Country.
Yuan Shao sent men to ask help from Liu Biao, but though Liu Biaomade promises he never actually sent anything. Neither would he help Cao Cao.
Liang Ji could make no reply to this, and Cui Qi was sent away.
Zhu Jun has already gained considerable success in Yingchuan, and now he is leading his army against the south and his plans are settled. All military writers caution against changing generals in the middle of a campaign. We may wait for days or even months, but he will eventually produce results."
Wang Fen was ordered to disband his soldiers, and was recalled to the capital soon afterwards.
An edict was issued that the excellencies and ministers, and commanderies and kingdoms, should recommend Extremely Filial candidates.
Then Cao Cao sent a messenger to summon him, and Tian Chou urged his servants to hasten his packing.
Xianfu [Yuan Shang] has Xiansi [Yuan Tan] in trouble, but he cannot defeat him, and this is because his strength is exhausted.
In the second month on the day jiyou [28 Mar] there was a fire in the Cloud Terrace of the Southern Palace.
The soldiers of the regiments [of the Northern Army] had always been accustomed to fear the authority of the palace officials, so Dou Wu's followers gradually came over to Wang Fu.Between dawn and the time of the morning meal almost all Dou Wu's men changed sides.
and some of his clerical officers urged Chen Qiu to send his family away out of danger. Chen Qiu replied angrily, "I hold the tiger tally from my government,29 and I have been given charge of this territory. How can I concern myself with wife and children if I harm the authority of the state by doing so? The next man to make any such suggestion will be executed." Then he had great trees strung to make bows, and feathered whole lances to make arrows, and he had a device to draw the weapon and fire it. Many of the enemy were killed or wounded.
You need only act quickly,and display the thunder of your power. Use your own judgment to make the decision, and both heaven and man will approve.
Angry and frightened, Zhang He joined with Gao Lan to burnthe engines of attack, and they went to Cao Cao's camp to surrender.
The emperor took note and became aware of the situation. As a result, all those related to members of the Proscribed Party only by descent from the same great-[162]grandfather, or by lesser degrees, were released from proscription.
In the autumn, in the seventh month on the day renzi [11 Aug] the Grand Commandant Zhu Jun was dismissed.
All Lu Qiang's family were put in prison and their property was confiscated.
Because Liu Zhang was dull and weak, Zhang Lu refused to accepthis orders, but attacked his Senior Major Zhang Xiu, killed him and took over his troops.
The emperor was greatly impressed by Zhang Huan's words, and questioned the eunuchs. Since his attendants opposed any such idea, however, the emperor could not follow his inclinations.
Yuan Shao refused, and became angry with him. He abolished JuShou's command and gave it to Guo Tu.
Then locusts came and there was a great famine. The supplies in Lu Bu's army were also exhausted, and they both drew away.
Then Cao Cao sent Zhong Yao against Hanzhong. Liu Zhangheard about it and was worried.
Liu Zhang promoted Cheng Ji to become Administratorof Jiangyang.
Fully confident of their position, therefore, the eunuchs built great houses for themselves, rivalling the imperial palace.
Cao Cao showed Sun Quan's letter around, remarking, "This boy would put me on top of the fire!"
Lü Bu was delighted, and immediately sent ChenDeng with a memorial of thanks for the favour, together with areply to the letter.
Even before he had finished speaking, Fu Xie sighed miserably and said, "You know that I must die. A sage is equal to any position, and even a lesser man should not fail his responsibilities.
Jiang Xu's mother was deeply touched. "Quite right, Boyi!" sheexclaimed. "When Commissioner Wei came to harm, that was alsoyour responsibility, not just Yishan's."What man does not die? And to die for loyalty and for honour,that is something worth while.
Fan Xian wanted to kill Du Ji in order to intimidate the people,but for the time being he waited to see what he would do. Hebeheaded the Registrar and some thirty other officers [of thecommandery] outside his gate, but Du Ji showed no sign of anxiety.
Slave, snarled Pang De, "what is this talk of surrender?
In the second month on the day yisi [13 Mar], first of the month,there was an eclipse of the sun.
Tao Qian the Governor of Xu province was seriously ill. He said to his Attendant Officer Mi Zhu of Donghai, "No-one but Liu Bei can ever give peace to this province."
About this time an edict was sent to all officials, that they should present an analysis of the most important concerns of the government. Cai Yong sent in a sealed memorandum which read: "Now the ceremonies of Welcoming the Ethers of the Seasons at the Five Suburban Sites, of worship at the Imperial Ancestral Temples, and of Entertaining the Aged at the Hall of the Circular Moat,11 these are the great work of the man who holds the imperial position, and this is the responsibility handed down to him from his ancestors.
The Master of Writing Zhu Mu objected to the eunuchs' abuse of power,and he sent in a letter, saying: "I note that in the old system of Han some Regular Attendants were chosen from full gentlemen. It is only since the Jianwuperiod [25-55 AD, in the time of the founding Emperor Guangwu of Later Han], that all these positions have been given to eunuchs.
btlety is the heavenly court, the seat of the Five Emperors, and the punishing stars of Metal [Venus] and Fire [Mars] were shining there.
He was notorious for corruption, and even the lavatory in the commandery residence had strange and unusual toys and devices, all of which he took home with him.
If you accept what I say, Ishall not die in vain." He died at Baqiu.
Zhu Mu later took the opportunity of a court audience to make a speech on the same theme: "I have heard that the ancient regulations of the house of Han provided for only one man to be appointed to each post of Palace Attendant and Regular Attendant,to control the affairs of the Imperial Secretariat [the Masters of Writing]. Another man was appointed as Gentleman at the Yellow Gates, and his responsibility was to transmit memorials and messages. All these officers were selected from men of respectable family.
Zhuge Liang was assistant to Liu Bei in the government of SHU. His rule was stem, and many of the people resented it.
Fu Xie, looking very serious, turned him down, "If I did well and no one noticed, that is simply a matter of luck.
Zong Zi shifted his attack to the Clerical Assistant Zhu Ling.
These Qiang and the other non-Chinese have evil hearts and the nature of dogs. I have not been able to bring them to order, but I shall stay to keep them quiet.
Hu Guang was experienced in matters of precedent, and could understand and explain any court regulations. For this reason there was a saying current in the capital, "When a myriad affairs are out of order, just ask Boshi; for charting a middle course, there is Lord Hu."
Then Qu Mu, Supervisor of the Palace Workshop,50 drew his sword and cut off He Jin's head at the front of the Hall of Excellent Virtue.
"Better wait until he comes further forward," considered Lü Bu,"then drive him into the Si River." [234]
Yu Fan went to see Hua Xin and said, "I know that both youand former Magistrate Wang [Lang] of my own commandery aremen of wide renown in the central provinces. All within the seashave heard your name, and although you have come down to theeast everyone regards you with respect." [264]
About this time the Commandant of Cavalry, Cao Cao of Pei kingdom, arrived with reinforcements, and in the fifth month Huangfu Song, Cao Cao, and Zhu Jun combined their armies and returned to the attack. They completely defeated the rebels and cut off heads by the tens of thousands.
Cai Yong sent in a memorial on this matter: "Now if we consider the two territories of You and Ji in ancient times, they are regions which produce armour and horses. In recent years, however, they have suffered war and famine, and have gradually been reduced to poverty and exhaustion.
When Liang Ji heard about this, he had the authorities in Luoyang arrest Chen Shou and examine him by torture. Chen Shou died in jail.
In the winter,in the tenth month it was ordered that King Cao of WEI should wear a crown with twelve pendants, and he should ride in a Root of Gold chariot drawn by six horses, with chariots of the five seasons to escort him.
Liu Bei appointed Jiang Wan of Lingling magistrate of Guangdu.
"War has its changes," replied Jia Xu. "Follow him quickly."
Next morning Mao Rong killed a chicken for the meal, and Guo Tai thought it was for him. Mao Rong, however, took half the bird to feed his mother and put the other half away into storage. He himself brought some vegetables to put into the dish to share with his guest.
In the spring, in the first month on the day dingchou [?xinchou=12 Feb]1there was an amnesty for the empire.
The eunuchs were full of anxiety and hatred for Li Ying and his associates, and edicts were sent down one after the other to confirm the proscription of the men of Faction.
When Guo Si realised his plan had been found out, he abandoned his troops and went away to the southern hills.
At my age of eighty years, I wish to remove this danger from you. I recommend that you take the occasion of the eclipse as a reason to dismiss the eunuchs, in order to avert the omen from Heaven."
Hua Xin considered, "To take advantageof such opportunity and seize command is not the conduct of a loyalservant." The people held him for several months but in the end theylet him go and still had no-one to lead them.
He was going to give him one of his daughters in marriage,
He kept his followers at a distance, there was no-one he would trust, and his best councillors and commanders gradually drifted away.
By this time winter had come. There was a drought, with no water for two hundred li, and the army was also short of food. They killed several thousand horses for their meat, and dug wells three hundred feet deep to get water.
At this time the Regular Attendant Yuan She wanted to obtain support from Yuan Feng and Yuan Wei, firstly because they came from a family of chief ministers, and secondly because they shared the same surname. As a result, the Yuan group became more prosperous and powerful than any others of the time; they were extremely wealthy and extravagant, quite different to any of the other families which had produced officials of excellency rank.
"Now, however, the only people consulted are the Masters of Writing, and there are even cases where imperial orders are dispatched without the knowledge of the Three Excellencies nor of the Masters of Writing. So the excellencies have been relieved of their duty for selection and appointment, and the Masters of Writing are no longer concerned when anyone behaves badly. As a result, nobody can be held responsible; and why should officials do a difficult job if there is no incentive of reward or punishment?"
Because military matters were still unsettled, Cao Caoaccepted the majority position and took no action.
Liu Biao was uncertain and could not make up his mind. He orderedHan Song to go to Xu city, saying to him, "We cannot tell how theempire will be settled, but Cao Cao holds the emperor in his capitalat Xu. Go and see what weaknesses he may have, then tell me."
In the sixth month on the day xinhai [7 Jul] the Dowager Dong died suddenly from grief and fear.
Having repaired the imperial tombs, Sun Jian led his army back to Luyang.
The Gentleman of the Palace Dou Wu, a great-great-grandson of Dou Rong, had a daughter who became an Honoured Lady.
Again, there was a time he rode in a chariot drawn by four donkeys, managing the reins himself, and raced around the park. All the capital imitated the new fashion, and the price of donkeys rose to equal that of horses.
but Xiahou Dun went up to see for himself. He came back and told Cao Cao, so they sent men forward to attack. Zhang Wei and his officers fled during the night.
Sun Jian sighed and said, "Together we raised loyal troops to save the nation. Now the rebels and bandits are almost destroyed, yet each can act like this. Whom can I work with?"
His property and treasure were confiscated, while his wife and [other] children were exiled to Bijing.
So he went to Luoyang and spoke to the Colonel of the City Gates Dou Wu and to the Master of Writing Huo Xu of Wei commandery and others, persuading them to appeal for redress of the wrongs done to the men of Faction.
and that he and his brothers spread dirt and corruption everywhere they went.
Gongsun Zan knew that Yuan Shu had ideas of rebellion and urged Liu Yu not to send troops, but Liu Yu would not agree.
And he wrote on a separate page,"I shall have no peace, my friend, until you are dead."
Jia Xu said that they couldpretend to accept this.
The Grand Commandant Hu Guang, the Excellency over the Masses Han Yan and the Excellency of Works Sun Lang were all found guilty of subservience to the Liang clan and of failing to protect the throne.They were detained at the Watch-House of Long Life,then sentenced to the death penalty remitted by one degree, and were dismissed to become commoners.
"Yet my brothers and I are the only ones who, without committing any crime, have been attacked and criticised by ministers of special power, while swarms of false witnesses have joined in plots against us. This has caused your majesty to neglect the compassion worthy of a forgiving mother, but display instead the anger which throws down the shuttle.
Zhou Yu left a daughter and two sons. Sun Quan had his eldestson Sun Deng marry the girl, while he appointed Zhou Yu's son Xun as Commandant of Cavalry and gave him his daughter inmarriage.22 [Zhou Yu's other son] Yin became Commandant WhoCarries on Tradition and married a woman of the Sun clan.
The emperor asked, "What do they want to do that is outside the law?"
Sun Ce made Zhang Hong Colonel of Upright Counsel and Zhang Zhao of Pengcheng was Chief Clerk. One would remain at base while the other accompanied the army on campaign. Qin Song, Chen Duan and other men of Guangling took part in planning.
She wasquick-witted and brave, with spirit equal to her brothers. She hadmore than a hundred serving-maids, and they all carried swords inattendance.
The governors of provinces and administrators of commanderies all follow the way the wind is blowing, and in their selection of candidates for office they reject the worthy men and put forward fools. It is for this reason that locusts appear, and that there is so much trouble from barbarians and bandits. Heaven has been angry about this for more than ten years now, so year after year there have been eclipses above and earthquakes below, in attempts to reprimand the ruler and bring him to his senses, that he may weed out those [of his ministers and attendants] who are unsuitable.
In former times Xiao [He] and Cao [Can] were boyhood friends of Gaozu, while Chen [Ping] and Han [Xin] came later as refugees. When ranking was discussed, Han Xin held the highest place, but I have not heard that either Xiao He or Cao Can were angry about it.
Before this, when Liu Bei was still in Jing province, Zhou Yu, Gan Ning and others had often urged Sun Quan to take over SHU.
In the enclosure [at Mei] there were twenty or thirty thousand catties of gold, eighty or ninety thousand catties of silver, with brocade, fine silk and rare ornaments piled up into mounds and hills.
Just at that time King Qiao [i.e. Supuyan] had fivethousand horsemen ready to help Yuan Tan, and Gongsun Kanghad also sent Han Zhong to grant him a seal and ribbon as Shanyu.
Though Zhuge Jin was sent on many embassies to SHU, he spoke with his younger brother Liang only in public assemblies, and never sought a private meeting.
Guan Yu is brave and fierce, replied Lü Meng. "It is difficult to match him. He already holds Jing province and he governs with great favour and good faith. Now that he has begun to be successful, his courage and strength are growing. It will not be easy to deal with him."
He Yong saw Cao Cao and he sighed and said, "The house of Han is falling, and this is the man who will give peace to the empire."
It is truly extraordinary that your majesty again shows concern for the remnants [159] of this group of wicked servants, and does not proceed to destroy them all.
Cao Cao wanted to go in person to attack Liu Bei, but his officersall advised him, "It is Yuan Shao who is fighting you for the empire,and he may make his move any time. If you turn east, and he comesin behind you, what happens then?"
The Heir Cao Pi executed Wei Feng, several thousand other men died because they were implicated, and Zhong Yao was dismissed.
Cao Cao brought his army forward to the Yuan River.3 Su You wasgoing to change sides, but the plan was discovered and he fled toCao Cao.
He also gave generous rewards to Huan Jie and appointed him a Master of Writing.
In the summer, in the fourth month, Yang Ci left office because of the rebellion.
Cao Caoreported that, "Zhao Wen has recommended a junior member of my family. His judgement cannot be trusted." He had the emperor dismiss him.
When Liu Bei went to attack Liu Zhang, he had left the General of the Household Huo Jun of Nan commandery to hold Jiameng city.
As the ministers followed the imperial carriage on foot, the soldiers went immediately into the palace, plundered the place and seized all the women.
Cao Cao heard of this, and he sighed with admiration, saying, "If the men in office are like this, then the people of the empire can govern themselves. What more need I do?"
Sun Quan sent Lu Xun, and he attacked and defeated him.
No-one can restrain their extravagance and their pride;they impoverish the empire and exhaust the people.
Then he shifted his administration to Xiangyang, kept the commanderies and counties in order and looked after them, and all the lands south of the Yangzi were settled.
He Jin had taken warning from Jian Shi's plot: claiming to be ill, he neither attended the mourning nor accompanied the funeral.
Whenever he spoke to the emperor, he would always address him as "Wise Majesty" or "Wise Emperor," and would describe Guo Si as wicked and recalcitrant. The emperor replied accordingly
Yang Xiu told King Cao of WEI about this, but Cao Cao delayed before looking into the accusation.
Both Chinese and non-Chinese peoplewere pleased with this, and none of the refugees that came to live inthis area dared to disobey his teachings.
When Yang Ci and Chen Dan were appointed as excellencies and ministers, and officials all paid them respects, they would sigh that Chen Shi was the man worthy of the highest positions, and they were ashamed to take precedence over him.
Dong Zhuo made himself Grand Commandant controlling the affairs of the General of the Van. He also took the Staff and Insignia, Battle-Axe, Ceremonial Axe and Gentlemen Rapid as Tigers, and changed his fief to become Marquis of Mei.
In the intercalary [fifth] month the Administrator of Yongchang Cao Luan sent in a letter which argued:"Among the men of Faction, some are elders and seniors of utmost virtue, and others are active gentlemen of worth and courage. All are suitable to act as ministers to the royal house and as assistants in the great councils of state."Yet these people have suffered long proscription, and they remain disgraced in dust and mud.
In the fifth month, on the day jihai, first of the month [3 Jun], there was an eclipse of the sun.
Hitherto, Yuan Shu had believed that he controlled the forces south of the Huai, while Sun Ce [south of the Yangzi] was certain to support him. When he got this letter he was sad and downcast and became ill.
When he received this memorial, the emperor thought of halting the program, but he asked the Palace Attendants Ren Zhi and Yue Song about it. They replied, "In former times the hunting park of King Wen [of Zhou] extended a hundred li, but the people considered it small. The park of King Xuan of Qi was five li, but the people considered it to be large.
Then Cao Cao divided Ba commandery, appointing Fuhu as Administrator of Badong and Duhu as Administrator of Baxi, while Ren Yue became Administrator of [the rump] Ba commandery. All were enfeoffed as marquises.
Lu Xun asked for gold, silver and bronze seals with which to bestow temporary appointments on those who came to him. He attacked Zhan Yan and other officers of SHU, and also the great clans of Zigui. All were defeated and surrendered. From start to finish, those killed, captured or brought to submission were numbered by the tens of thousands.
In the third month the Chendi Qiang raided Zhangye and Jiuquan.
"My lord and Yuan Shao are in a critical fight," replied LiTong, "and many commanderies and counties have turned away torebellion. If the silk is not collected and sent to the capital, thosewho hear of it will surely claim that my loyalty is suspect and that Iam waiting to see who wins."
f only your majesty would keep slanderers and men of flattery at a distance, and hold close to men that are honest.Then the omen of disaster may be averted."
Cao Cao sent Zhang Liao and Guan Yu to go ahead and beginthe attack.
Cao Cao sent Liu Beiand his general Zhu Ling of Qinghe to intercept them.11 Yuan Shucould not get through and was forced back towards Shouchun.
The men of their two armies met one another, drinking and making merry formore than a hundred days.
If we accept their surrender, it will not encourage the people to practise virtue; [189] but if we kill them it will be sufficient warning for everyone to avoid evil conduct.
He also appointed Yuan Shu as General of the Rear and Cao Cao as Colonel of Resolute Cavalry.
Dong Zhuo, however, paid no attention, but camped in Hedong to await developments.
Duke Cao of WEI sent Xiahou Yuan to relieve Ji city, but the placehad fallen before the relief had arrived it,
"And send the Director of Retainers to establish his admini stration and bring the people under his control.
Han Zhong withdrew to the citadel, but he was frightened and asked to surrender.
I am sorry you did not come earlier, for not one of my ministers has said this to me before."
In the third month Cao Cao sent the Director of Retainers ZhongYao to attack Zhang Lu, and the Protector of the Army WhoSubdues the West Xiahou Yuan and others were dispatched withtroops to move out from Hedong and join up with Zhong Yao.
Ju Yuan had guards arrest Zhang Yun on the charge that he had entered the palace without proper authorisation and was planning some act of rebellion.
Yan Liang and Wen Chou haveonly the bravery of common fellows. One battle will be enough todeal with them."
Chen Gui was afraid that Xu and Yang [provinces, Lü Bu andYuan Shu] would form an alliance and cause unending trouble. Hewent to Lü Bu and said, "Lord Cao has received the Son of Heavenand is supporting the government of the state. You should join withhim to preserve the empire. B
Kong Bao, however, claimed, "That man came to seek help from me. It is no fault of my younger brother."
He styled himself General of Chariots and Cavalry, and his associates likewise awarded themselves temporary commissions.1
In the autumn, in the seventh month on the day jiazi [miswritten for jiawu = 17 Sep] the emperor came out by the Xuanping Gate. As he was about to cross the bridge, several hundred of Guo Si's men blocked the way and said, "Isn't this the Son of Heaven?"
so Cao Cao went with the major Xiahou Dun of Pei state and others to Yang province, where he made a levy of troops.He gathered about a thousand men, and brought them to camp in Henei [with Yuan Shao].
Before this, when Dong Zhuo entered the passes to Chang'an he left Zhu Jun to guard Luoyang. Zhu Jun, however, was in secret contactwith the east of the mountains. Afraid that Dong Zhuo would attack him, he fled to Jing province.
Lu Xun came to Lukou, and he wrote to Guan Yu praising hisachievements. He was humble and restrained and sounded utterlyreliable and loyal.
Then the emperor went to the Front Hall [of the Southern Palace],where he summoned all the officers of the Secretariat and advised them of the situation. He had the Director Yin Xun, bearing the Staff of Authority,take direct commandof his subordinates, while the gentlemen and other junior officials held weapons to guard the doors.[It was ordered that] all seals and tallies were to be collected and sent to the palace.Then Ju Yuan led a party of grooms from the imperial stables, Rapid Tiger and Feathered Forest guards, and Warriors with Swords and Lances of the Captains at the Capital,a thousand men altogether, to join the Director of Retainers Zhang Biao and surround LiangJi's lodgings.The Minister of the Household Yuan Xu was sent in with the Staff of Authority to take away Liang Ji's seal and ribbon as General- in-Chief,and to transfer his fief to the marquisate of the chief district of Bijing.
Wang Yun had no alternative but to go down and see them.
Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu had an army of twenty or thirty thousand men, but the river held them away from Cao Ren and they could not attack.
The Chancellor of thekingdom, Luo Jun of Kuaiji, had also shown authority and gainedfavour in the past. At that time the kings and marquises no longer received theirrevenues. They were often robbed, some ate just once every otherday, and some even died in ditches. Only Chen was wealthy andstrong, and more than a hundred thousand people came from theneighbouring commanderies.
Ying Feng sent in a letter, saying, "Now, loyal and worthy military commanders are the backbone of the state.
In the winter, in the tenth month Duke Cao of WEI sent Xiahou Yuan from Xingguo to attack Song Jian. They besieged and captured Fuhan, and cut off Song Jian!s head.
Han Song was made Minister Herald, Kuai Yue became Minister of the Household, Liu Xian became a Master of Writing and Deng Xi became a Palace Attendant.
Later Wang Cheng died, and Li Xie arranged his funeral with full ceremony.At each of the four seasons he held sacrifices appropriate to one who was a most respected guest.
"Think back," replied Huangfu Li. "The general will surely recall how strong was Dong Zhuo just a short time ago. Lu Bu was his favourite, but then he led a plot against him, and before very long Dong Zhuo's head and body were in different places. That is what happens to men who have adequate courage but fail to make proper plans.
Though Sun Ce had held Kuaiji, Wu commandery, Danyang,Yuzhang, Lujiang and Luling, there was still difficult country whichhad not been brought fully under control.
Cao Cao called for men to break the enemy line, and the Major Dian Wei of Chenliu led out a group of volunteers. Lu Bu's archers and crossbowmen fired at them from every direction, and the arrows and bolts came down like rain.
Xiahou Yuan was appointed General Chief Protector, with authority over Zhang He, Xu Huang and others to hold Hanzhong, while the Chief Clerk to the Chancellor Du Xi became Commandant of Attendant Cavalry, responsible for administration.
Hesent a messenger to Cao Cao, suggesting that since Xu city lay inmarsh country and Luoyang was in ruins, the capital should move toJuancheng in order to be closer to supplies.
In the summer in the fourth month the Grand Commandant Guo Xi left office. The Palace Counsellor Wenren Xi became Grand Commandant.
Your servant Sima Guang remarks:Teaching is of utmost importance to the state, but officials of the common sort treat it with contempt. Custom is the greatest matter for the empire, yet there are stupid rulers who neglect it.
Hou Lan and Duan Gui reported this to the emperor, and Teng Yan was found guilty.He was ordered to report to the Ministry of Justice and was then dismissed from office.
He ordered Xu Huang to publish Sun Quan's letter both to the men inside the siege and to Guan Yu's camp. When the defenders heard about it, their spirits were raised a hundred times. Guan Yu, however, suspected it was a trick and did not withdraw.
On the other hand, should I appear to distrust him he will certainly become angry and will decide against us."
Huan Jie of Changsha suggested that he raise the three command eries of Changsha, Lingling and Guiyang against Liu Biao and senda messenger to Cao Cao. Zhang Xian did this.
Deserters from Lu Bu's army said, "Chen Gong is coming to take Dong'a, and he will send Fan Yi to capture Fan."
Lu Su criticised the refusal to hand back the three command- eries. Guan Yu replied, "In the campaign at Wulin the General of the Left fought personally in the ranks, destroying the powerfill and defeating the enemy. Why should he give such toil for nothing, and receive not a single clod of earth? Yet you come and want to take his territory."
Cao Cao asked Guo Jia. Guo Jia said, "There is truth in that.
Dianyu got down from his horse and offered it to He Xun, but He Xun refused to mount and so he was captured by the Qiang.
In the spring, in the first month, Cao Cao attacked Zhang Xiu. Ashis army reached the Yu River, Zhang Xiu came to surrender withall his troops.
Then his uncle Sun Jing [his father's youngerbrother] said to him, "Wang Lang holds the town defences, and it isdifficult to storm them quickly.
Wang Lang, completelysurprised, sent Zhou Xin the former Administrator of Danyang withtroops to oppose the attack. Sun Ce defeated them and took theheads of Zhou Xin and others.
You have treatedGongtai no more generously than Cao Cao did, yet you intend toleave him the whole city, abandoning your wife and children, andgo off alone with your army. If there is a sudden change, how wouldI be your wife any more?"
Soon, when the empire is settled, each man will be able to go back to his native place and plough his own soil, and that is the way things should be.
The Lianyu Qiang and all the people of the Xianlian Qiang made a rebellion.They plundered the Three Adjuncts.
"In the south,"replied Yuan Shao, "I would hold the Yellow River, and in the northI would reach to Yan and Dai. Then I could collect the hosts ofbarbarians in the north and turn south to fight for the empire. Thatshould do it."
That area, however, is all dry land, and good cavalry can gallop there.If your honour takes Xu province now, you may be sure that Cao Cao will come to fight for it in a matter of weeks. Even if you stationed seventy or eighty thousand men to hold the territory, it would still be cause for concern.
On that very day,however, Guo Tai was at the academy. Zuo Yuan remembered what had been said to him before and felt ashamed of himself. So he gave up his plan and went away.
So he went with Lu Su to Sun Quan.
In the eleventh month Wang Guo besieged Chencang.
In the twelfth month the Xianbi, together with the Hui and the Mo people, raided the two provinces You and Bing.
but Gongsun Zan came up when they were only half across. The rebels were again defeated, the dead were several tens of thousands, and so much blood flowed that the water turned red. He captured more than seventy thousand alive, and it was impossible to count the quantity of armour and carriages and treasure. The fear of his name spread wide.
The Administrator of Cangwu, Zhang Xu, had been captured by the rebels. Both he and Ren Yin were summoned to the capital and sentenced to public execution.
Liu Dai discussed the problem with his subordinates, but days passed and they could not decide. They had heard that Cheng Yu of Dong commandery was wise in planning, so they called him in and asked his advice."If you give up the alliance with Yuan Shao who is close at hand," said Cheng Yu, "and look for distant aid from Gongsun Zan, that is like seeking help from a man of Yue when your son is drowning.
Three chieftains of the Wuhuan in Dai commandery had all styled themselves Shanyu. Relying upon their strength, they acted arrogantly and wilfully, and the Administrator could not keep them under control.
YuanShang was the favourite of Yuan Shao's later wife from the Liuclan, who often praised him to Yuan Shao.
and Zhou Yu crossed the Yangzi and camped on the northern bank to oppose Cao Ren directly.
There was a prophecy which read, "The one to replace Han shall be 'high road'," and Yuan Shu said that the characters of [191] his personal name and style agreed with it.
The troops in Wei commandery rebelled and joined Poison Yu and the Black Mountain bandits; their combined force numbered several tens of thousands. They stormed Ye city [the capital of Wei commandery] and killed the Administrator.
The Inspector of Yang province Wen Hui said to the Inspector of Yan province Pei Qian, "Though the enemy come against us, we have nothing to worry about here.
and he also awarded marquisates to Zhang Lu's five sons, to Yan Pu and some others.
"but a lesser man keeps to his duty. I keep to my duty. Oncethe name of master and servant has been settled, it must be held tothe death.
Zhang Wen also sent Dong Zhuo forward with thirty thousand men to attack the Xianlian Qiang, but the Qiang and other barbarians from the north surrounded him north of Wangyuan. His supplies were cut off and running low. There was a river crossing nearby, and he built a dam Zhang Wen also sent Dong Zhuo forward with thirty thousand men to attack the Xianlian Qiang, but the Qiang and other barbarians from the north surrounded him north of Wangyuan. His supplies were cut off and running low. There was a river crossing nearby, and he built a dam there as if he planned to catch fish, but instead he quietly moved his army to the other side of the river.
"Again, your majesty loves to go incognito to the homes of your close associates, and you honour the residences of eunuchs with private visits. Clients and retainers may be bargained for in the market-place, andauthority is peddled at the roadside; so oppression springs up everywhere and everything is open to influence.
Many walled cities in Ji province surrendered to Cao Cao.
If you made Qi into soup, I would still drink it."
Duan Jiong got down from his horse to join the battle, and fighting continued until midday.His sword was broken and arrows were exhausted, but the enemy also began to draw back.
The men of Faction lived in an age of confusion and disorder, when all things were out of place and the four seas were in turmoil. They sought to solve problems by the words of their mouths, giving judgements of good and bad as a means to wipe out evil and restore purity. They sought to seize snakes and vipers by the head, and trample the tails of tigers and wolves. But it was they who were injured and wrongfully punished, and the misfortune reached their friends. Men of quality were destroyed, and the nation went on to disaster. The pity of it!
Li Yan, the rebel and bandit of Guiyang, with his followers, ravaged the territory of that commandery,The barbarians of Wuling made another uprising.
On the day bingwu [8 Dec] the Minister of Ceremonies Zhao Wen became Excellency of Works with control of the Secretariat.
When that happens, send your best men to occupy the strategic places and attack them. This way you will win."
Zou Tuo and Qian Tong of Wucheng, Wang Sheng of Jiaxingand other leaders each collected thousands of men, some as many asten thousand, and refused to submit to Sun Ce.
The road to the south is narrow and thetrees and bushes are thick. You should not follow him."
Sun Jian's advance division replied, "We have long suffered the toil of fighting and labour, and we come to ask you for supplies."
In the autumn, in the seventh month, Zhang Xiu gathered his followers to make rebellion and they raided the commanderies and counties. The people of that time called them the Rice Rebels.
Before this, Zhang Hong had urged Sun Quan to set his centre ofgovernment at Moling, as it was a fine site [438] among rivers andhills.
Lu Xun then arranged the eastern three commanderies into divisions and units,so that able-bodied men became soldiers and the weak were brought to fill vacancies in the registers of households. He obtained several ten thousand good soldiers,
And before this, the Chancellor of Pengcheng, Xue Li, driven out by Tao Qian, had set camp at Moling.Zhai Rong was greedy for the wealth and goods of Guangling, so he murdered Zhao Yu at a drinking party, let loose his soldiers to plunder far and wide, then crossed the Yangzi to join Xue Li. Later he killed him too.
"The former Grand Commandant Duan Jiong was one of the finest military heroes of the age, with long experience of affairs on the frontier. He served in the wars from the time he was a child with hanging locks, and his achievement reached its culmination when his hair was white with age. He served two emperors [yourself and Emperor Huan your predecessor] one after the other, his glory and merit were unique in splendour,
He wanted Jia Kui to enter his service, and took a sword tothreaten him, but Jia Kui made no move.
I fear that whenthings are decided there will be accusations made and punishmentscarried out, and you will be one of the first to be executed!"
On the day yihai [miswritten for dinghai = 27 Dec?] the emperor came to Anyi riding in an oxcart. Wang Yi the Administrator of Hedong offered tribute of cotton and silk; it was all distributed among the ministers and officials, and Wang Yi was enfeoffed as a marquis. Hu Cai was made General Who Subdues the East and Zhang Yang became General Who Gives Tranquillity to the State. Both held the Staff of Authority with the right to maintain offices.
and Xu Huang set camp no more than thirty feet from Guan Yu's siege-works.He dug tunnels into the city and shot letters to Cao Ren on arrows, so news and information were exchanged several times.
When you go down to see his honour [Sun Quan] you should make good plans."
Guo Tai saw this and admired him, so he asked to stay with him.
On the Day of Washing the Buddha enormous quantities of food and drink were set out on mats along the roads for scores of li, and the wastage was counted in hundreds and hundreds of thousands.
Yang Fu wept and cried inprotest, "We brought our fathers and elder brothers here, our sonsand younger brothers, urging them to fight for glory. We can onlydie for the cause. We have a duty to hold this city.
Chen Fan, Director of the Secretariat, recommended five scholars living in retirement: Xu Zhi of Yuzhang, Jiang Gong of Pengcheng, Yuan Hong of Runan, Wei Zhu of Jingzhao and Li Tan of Yingchuan.
In our humble opinion, the best policy is to receive him."
In the spring, in the first month Ji Miao and his fellows led a thousand supporters to attack Wang Bi by night. They burnt down his gate and shot Wang Bi in the shoulder. His Controller at Headquarters helped him escape to the southern part of the city,and when dawn came Ji Miao's party was in disorder.
Lu Bu had outposts west of Puyang. Cao Cao attacked them by night and destroyed them.
Sun Ce had already settled the area east of Xuancheng, and only the sixcounties west of Jing had not yet submitted.
Yuan Shao hung his insignia of office on the Upper East Gate and escaped to Ji province.
Sun Ce did this. That night he had a great number of fires lit topretend there were soldiers there,
Cheng Yu also sent a detachment of cavalry to hold the CangtingCrossing, and when Chen Gong arrived he could advance no further.
In the fifth month on the day gengshen [13 Jul] there was a fire in the offices of the Palace of Perpetual Joy.
but Liu Qi was furious and threw the seal on the ground. He intended to go back for the funeral and use the occasion to make trouble,
This way, we can settle thebusiness at leisure."
and Ma Chao came out tofight while Xiahou Yuan was still more than two hundred li fromthe city. Xiahou Yuan attacked him, but without success.
Tian Chou then spoke to the elders and said, "Now the people here are as many as a city, yet there is no single government for them and no laws to guide them. I fear this is not the way to keep our peace.
In the ninth month the Excellency of Works Huang Qiong left office.The Minister Herald, Liu Chong of Donglai, became Excellency of Works.
But Du Shang followed them, penetrating several hundred li, destroying three of their encampments and capturing great quantities of treasure.
